MEC is an innovative network paradigm to cater for the
unprecedented growth of computation demands and the everincreasing computation quality of user experience requirements. It aims at enabling Cloud Computing capabilities and
IT services in close proximity to end users, by pushing
abundant computational and storage resources towards the
network edges. The direct interaction between mobile devices
and edge servers through wireless communications brings the
possibility of supporting applications with ultra-low latency
requirement, prolonging device battery lives and facilitating
highly-efficient network operations. However, they come along
with various new design considerations and unique challenges
due to reasons such as the complex wireless environments and
the inherent limited computation capacities of MEC servers.
In this survey, we presented a comprehensive overview and
research outlook of MEC from the communication perspective.
To this end, we first summarized the modeling methodologies
on key components of MEC systems such as the computation
tasks, communications, as well as mobile devices and MEC
servers computation. This help characterize the latency and
energy performance of MEC systems. Based upon the system
modeling, we conducted a comprehensive literature review
on recent research efforts on resource management for MEC
under various system architectures, which exploit the concepts
of computation offloading, joint radio-and-computational resource allocation, MEC server scheduling, as well as multiserver selection and cooperation. A number of potential research directions were then identified, including MEC deployment issues, cache-enabled MEC, mobility management
for MEC, green MEC, as well as security-and-privacy issues
in MEC. Key research problems and preliminary solutions
for each of these directions were elaborated. Finally, we
introduced the recent standardization efforts from industry,
along with several typical use scenarios. The comprehensive
overview and research outlook on MEC provided in this
survey hopefully can serve as useful references and valuable
guidelines for further in-depth investigations of MEC.