Software survey: VOSviewer, a computer program
for bibliometric mapping
 Nees Jan van Eck • Ludo Waltman
 Received: 31 July 2009 / Published online: 31 December 2009
 The Author(s) 2009. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
 Abstract
We present VOSviewer, a freely available computer program that we have
developed for constructing and viewing bibliometric maps. Unlike most computer pro-
grams that are used for bibliometric mapping, VOSviewer pays special attention to the
graphical representation of bibliometric maps. The functionality of VOSviewer is espe-
cially useful for displaying large bibliometric maps in an easy-to-interpret way. The paper
consists of three parts. In the ﬁrst part, an overview of VOSviewer’s functionality for
displaying bibliometric maps is provided. In the second part, the technical implementation
of speciﬁc parts of the program is discussed. Finally, in the third part, VOSviewer’s ability
to handle large maps is demonstrated by using the program to construct and display a
co-citation map of 5,000 major scientiﬁc journals.
 Keywords
Bibliometric mapping  Science mapping  Visualization 
VOSviewer  VOS  Journal co-citation analysis
 Introduction
 Bibliometric mapping is an important research topic in the ﬁeld of bibliometrics (for an
overview, see Bo¨rner et al. 2003). Two aspects of bibliometric mapping that can be
 This is an extended and signiﬁcantly revised version of a paper presented at the 12th International
Conference on Scientometrics and Informetrics (Rio de Janeiro, July 14–17, 2009).
 N. J. van Eck (&)  L. Waltman
Centre for Science and Technology Studies, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands
e-mail: ecknjpvan@cwts.leidenuniv.nl
 L. Waltman
e-mail: waltmanlr@cwts.leidenuniv.nl
 N. J. van Eck  L. Waltman
Econometric Institute, Erasmus School of Economics, Erasmus University Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands
 123
 Scientometrics (2010) 84:523–538
DOI 10.1007/s11192-009-0146-3

distinguished are the construction of bibliometric maps and the graphical representation of
such maps. In the bibliometric literature, most attention is paid to the construction of
bibliometric maps. Researchers for example study the effect of different similarity mea-
sures (e.g., Ahlgren et al. 2003; Klavans and Boyack 2006a; Van Eck and Waltman 2009),
and they experiment with different mapping techniques (e.g., Boyack et al. 2005; Van Eck
and Waltman 2007b; White 2003). The graphical representation of bibliometric maps
receives considerably less attention. Although some researchers seriously study issues
concerning graphical representation (e.g., Chen 2003, 2006; Skupin 2004), most papers
published in the bibliometric literature rely on simple graphical representations provided
by computer programs such as SPSS and Pajek. For small maps containing no more than,
say, 100 items, simple graphical representations typically yield satisfactory results.
However, there seems to be a trend towards larger maps (e.g., Boyack et al. 2005; Klavans
and Boyack 2006b; Leydesdorff 2004; Van Eck et al. 2006, in press), and for such maps
simple graphical representations are inadequate. The graphical representation of large
bibliometric maps can be much enhanced by means of, for example, zoom functionality,
special labeling algorithms, and density metaphors. This kind of functionality is not
incorporated into the computer programs that are commonly used by bibliometric
researchers. In this paper, we therefore introduce a new computer program for bibliometric
mapping. This program pays special attention to the graphical representation of biblio-
metric maps.
The computer program that we introduce is called VOSviewer. VOSviewer is a program
that we have developed for constructing and viewing bibliometric maps. The program is
freely available to the bibliometric research community (see www.vosviewer.com).
VOSviewer can for example be used to construct maps of authors or journals based on co-
citation data or to construct maps of keywords based on co-occurrence data. The program
offers a viewer that allows bibliometric maps to be examined in full detail. VOSviewer can
display a map in various different ways, each emphasizing a different aspect of the map. It
has functionality for zooming, scrolling, and searching, which facilitates the detailed
examination of a map. The viewing capabilities of VOSviewer are especially useful for
maps containing at least a moderately large number of items (e.g., at least 100 items). Most
computer programs that are used for bibliometric mapping do not display such maps in a
satisfactory way.
To construct a map, VOSviewer uses the VOS mapping technique (Van Eck and
Waltman 2007a), where VOS stands for visualization of similarities. For earlier studies in
which the VOS mapping technique was used, we refer to Van Eck and Waltman (2007b)
and Van Eck et al. (in press). VOSviewer can display maps constructed using any suitable
mapping technique. Hence, the program can be employed not only for displaying maps
constructed using the VOS mapping technique but also for displaying maps constructed
using techniques such as multidimensional scaling. VOSviewer runs on a large number of
hardware and operating system platforms and can be started directly from the internet.
In the remainder of this paper, we ﬁrst discuss for what type of bibliometric maps
VOSviewer is intended to be used. We then provide an overview of VOSviewer’s func-
tionality for displaying bibliometric maps. We also elaborate on the technical imple-
mentation of speciﬁc parts of the program. Finally, to demonstrate VOSviewer’s ability to
handle large maps, we use the program to construct and display a co-citation map of 5,000
major scientiﬁc journals.
 524
N. J. van Eck, L. Waltman
 123

Types of bibliometric maps
 Two types of maps can be distinguished that are commonly used in bibliometric research.1
 We refer to these types of maps as distance-based maps and graph-based maps. Distance-
based maps are maps in which the distance between two items reﬂects the strength of the
relation between the items. A smaller distance generally indicates a stronger relation. In
many cases, items are distributed quite unevenly in distance-based maps. On the one hand
this makes it easy to identify clusters of related items, but on the other hand this sometimes
makes it difﬁcult to label all the items in a map without having labels that overlap each
other. Graph-based maps are maps in which the distance between two items need not
reﬂect the strength of the relation between the items. Instead, lines are drawn between
items to indicate relations. Items are often distributed in a fairly uniform way in graph-
based maps. This may have the advantage that there are less problems with overlapping
labels. In our opinion, a disadvantage of graph-based maps compared with distance-based
maps is that it typically is more difﬁcult to see the strength of the relation between two
items. Clusters of related items may also be more difﬁcult to detect.
In Table 1, we list some mapping techniques that are used in bibliometric research to
construct distance-based and graph-based maps. For constructing distance-based maps,
multidimensional scaling (e.g., Borg and Groenen 2005) is by far the most popular tech-
nique in the ﬁeld of bibliometrics. An alternative to multidimensional scaling is the VOS
mapping technique (Van Eck and Waltman 2007a, b; Van Eck et al. 2006). In general, this
technique produces better structured maps than multidimensional scaling (Van Eck et al.
2008). Another technique for constructing distance-based maps is VxOrd (Davidson et al.
2001; Klavans and Boyack 2006b).2 This technique is especially intended for constructing
maps that contain very large numbers of items (more than 700,000 items in Klavans and
Boyack 2006b). A disadvantage of VxOrd is that a complete speciﬁcation of how the
technique works is not available. A fourth technique for constructing distance-based maps
was proposed by Kopcsa and Schiebel (1998). This technique is implemented in a com-
puter program called BibTechMon.
For constructing graph-based maps, researchers in the ﬁeld of bibliometrics (e.g., de
Moya-Anego´n et al. 2007; Leydesdorff and Rafols 2009; Vargas-Quesada and de Moya-
Anego´n 2007; White 2003) usually use a mapping technique developed by Kamada and
Kawai (1989). Sometimes an alternative technique proposed by Fruchterman and Reingold
(1991) is used (e.g., Bollen et al. 2009; Leydesdorff 2004). A popular computer program in
which both techniques are implemented is Pajek (De Nooy et al. 2005). Some researchers
(e.g., de Moya-Anego´n et al. 2007; Vargas-Quesada and de Moya-Anego´n 2007; White
2003) combine the Kamada–Kawai technique with the technique of pathﬁnder networks
(Schvaneveldt 1990; Schvaneveldt et al. 1988). Two other computer programs that can be
used to construct graph-based maps are CiteSpace (Chen 2006) and the Network Work-
bench Tool. Even more programs are available in the ﬁeld of social network analysis (for
an overview, see Huisman and Van Duijn 2005).
Distance-based and graph-based maps both have advantages and disadvantages. In
VOSviewer, we have chosen to support only distance-based maps. VOSviewer can be
employed to view any two-dimensional distance-based map, regardless of the mapping
 1 We do not consider maps that are primarily intended for showing developments over time. Such maps are
for example provided by the HistCite software of Eugene Garﬁeld (e.g., Garﬁeld, 2009).
2 A computer implementation of VxOrd is available at www.cs.sandia.gov/*smartin/software.html as part
of the DrL toolbox.
 Software survey
525
 123

technique that has been used to construct the map. One can employ VOSviewer to view
multidimensional scaling maps constructed using statistical packages such as SAS, SPSS,
and R, but one can also employ VOSviewer to view maps constructed using other, less
common techniques. Because the VOS mapping technique shows a very good performance
(Van Eck et al. 2008), this technique has been fully integrated into VOSviewer. This means
that VOSviewer can be used not only to view VOS maps but also to construct them. Hence,
no separate computer program is needed for constructing VOS maps.
 Functionality of VOSviewer
 In this section, we provide an overview of VOSviewer’s functionality for displaying bib-
liometric maps.3 We use a data set that consists of co-citation frequencies of journals
belonging to at least one of the following ﬁve closely related subject categories of Thomson
Reuters: Business, Business-Finance, Economics, Management, and Operations Research
& Management Science. The co-citation frequencies of journals were determined based on
citations in articles published between 2005 and 2007 to articles published in 2005. A
journal was included in the data set only if it had at least 25 co-citations. There were 232
journals that satisﬁed this condition. Based on a clustering technique, the journals in the data
set were divided into ﬁve clusters. The data set is available at www.vosviewer.com.
Two maps constructed based on the journal co-citation data set are shown in Figs. 1 and
2. The ﬁgures were obtained using, respectively, SPSS and Pajek, which are both com-
monly used computer programs for bibliometric mapping. The map shown in Fig. 1 is a
distance-based map constructed using multidimensional scaling. The map shown in Fig. 2
is a graph-based map constructed using the Kamada–Kawai technique (Kamada and Kawai
1989). As can be seen, SPSS and Pajek both provide rather simple graphical representa-
tions of bibliometric maps. The programs both have serious problems with overlapping
labels. Due to these problems, maps can be difﬁcult to interpret, especially in the details. In
the rest of this section, we demonstrate how VOSviewer overcomes the limitations of
simple graphical representations provided by programs such as SPSS and Pajek.
A screenshot of the main window of VOSviewer is shown in Fig. 3. Depending on the
available data, VOSviewer can display a map in three or four different ways. The different
ways of displaying a map are referred to as the label view, the density view, the cluster
density view, and the scatter view. We now discuss each of these views:
 •
Label view. In this view, items are indicated by a label and, by default, also by a circle.
The more important an item, the larger its label and its circle. If colors have been
assigned to items, each item’s circle is displayed in the color of the item. By default, to
avoid overlapping labels, only a subset of all labels is displayed. The label view is
 Table 1 Some mapping
techniques for constructing
distance-based and graph-based
maps
 Distance-based maps
Graph-based maps
 Multidimensional scaling
VOS
VxOrd
Kopcsa–Schiebel
 Kamada–Kawai
Fruchterman–Reingold
Pathﬁnder networks
 3 For a more extensive discussion of the functionality of VOSviewer, we refer to the VOSviewer manual,
which is available at www.vosviewer.com.
 526
N. J. van Eck, L. Waltman
 123

Fig. 1 Map obtained using SPSS
 Fig. 2 Map obtained using Pajek
 Software survey
527
 123

particularly useful for a detailed examination of a map.
An example of the label view is shown in Fig. 4. The map shown in this ﬁgure was
constructed based on the journal co-citation data set discussed at the beginning of this
section. Colors indicate the cluster to which a journal was assigned by the clustering
technique that we used. As can be seen, there is a strong agreement between the
structure of the map and the clustering obtained using our clustering technique. The
clustering also has a straightforward interpretation. The ﬁve clusters correspond with
the following research ﬁelds: accounting/ﬁnance, economics, management, marketing,
and operations research.4 It is clear that the map shown in Fig. 4 is much easier to
interpret than the maps shown in Figs. 1 and 2. This demonstrates one of the main
advantages of VOSviewer over commonly used computer programs such as SPSS and
Pajek.
•
Density view. In this view, items are indicated by a label in a similar way as in the label
view. Each point in a map has a color that depends on the density of items at that point.
That is, the color of a point in a map depends on the number of items in the
neighborhood of the point and on the importance of the neighboring items. The density
view is particularly useful to get an overview of the general structure of a map and to
draw attention to the most important areas in a map. We will discuss the technical
implementation of the density view later on in this paper.
 4 Although this is not directly visible in Fig. 4, we note that there is a large overlap in the map between the
Business and Management subject categories of Thomson Reuters. This indicates an important difference
between the clustering that we found and the clustering provided by the subject categories of Thomson
Reuters.
 Fig. 3 Screenshot of the main window of VOSviewer
 528
N. J. van Eck, L. Waltman
 123

An example of the density view is shown in Fig. 5. The map shown in this ﬁgure is the
same as the one shown in Fig. 4. The density view immediately reveals the general
structure of the map. Especially the economics and management areas turn out to be
important. These areas are very dense, which indicates that overall the journals in these
areas receive a lot of citations. It can also be seen that there is a clear separation
between the ﬁelds of accounting, ﬁnance, and economics on the one hand and the ﬁelds
of management, marketing, and operations research on the other hand. Like Fig. 4,
Fig. 5 demonstrates VOSviewer’s ability to provide easy-to-interpret graphical
representations of bibliometric maps.
•
Cluster density view. This view is available only if items have been assigned to clusters.
The cluster density view is similar to the ordinary density view except that the density
of items is displayed separately for each cluster of items. The cluster density view is
particularly useful to get an overview of the assignment of items to clusters and of the
way in which clusters of items are related to each other. We will discuss the technical
implementation of the cluster density view later on in this paper.
Unfortunately, the cluster density view cannot be shown satisfactorily in black and
white. We therefore do not show an example of the cluster density view.
•
Scatter view. This is a simple view in which items are indicated by a small circle and in
which no labels are displayed. If colors have been assigned to items, each item’s circle
is displayed in the color of the item. The scatter view focuses solely on the general
structure of a map and does not provide any detailed information.
 Fig. 4 Screenshot of the label view
 Software survey
529
 123

In addition to the four views discussed above, another important feature of VOSviewer
is its ability to handle large maps. VOSviewer can easily construct maps that contain
several thousands of items, and it can display maps that contain more than 10,000 items.
VOSviewer has functionality for zooming, scrolling, and searching, which facilitates the
detailed examination of large maps. When displaying a map, VOSviewer uses a special
algorithm to determine which labels can be displayed and which labels cannot be dis-
played without having labels that overlap each other. The further one zooms in on a
speciﬁc area of a map, the more labels become visible. Later on in this paper, we will
demonstrate VOSviewer’s ability to handle large maps by using the program to construct
and display a co-citation map of 5,000 major scientiﬁc journals. In the next two sections,
however, we will ﬁrst elaborate on the technical implementation of speciﬁc parts of
VOSviewer.
 Construction of a map
 VOSviewer constructs a map based on a co-occurrence matrix. The construction of a map
is a process that consists of three steps. In the ﬁrst step, a similarity matrix is calculated
based on the co-occurrence matrix. In the second step, a map is constructed by applying the
VOS mapping technique to the similarity matrix. And ﬁnally, in the third step, the map is
translated, rotated, and reﬂected. We now discuss each of these steps in more detail.
 Fig. 5 Screenshot of the density view
 530
N. J. van Eck, L. Waltman
 123

Step 1: similarity matrix
 The VOS mapping technique requires a similarity matrix as input. A similarity matrix can
be obtained from a co-occurrence matrix by normalizing the latter matrix, that is, by
correcting the matrix for differences in the total number of occurrences or co-occurrences
of items. The most popular similarity measures for normalizing co-occurrence data are the
cosine and the Jaccard index. VOSviewer, however, does not use one of these similarity
measures. Instead, it uses a similarity measure known as the association strength (Van Eck
and Waltman 2007b; Van Eck et al. 2006). This similarity measure is sometimes also
referred to as the proximity index (e.g., Peters and Van Raan 1993; Rip and Courtial 1984)
or as the probabilistic afﬁnity index (e.g., Zitt et al. 2000). Using the association strength,
the similarity sij between two items i and j is calculated as
 sij ¼ cij
wiwj
;
ð1Þ
 where cij denotes the number of co-occurrences of items i and j and where wi and wj denote
either the total number of occurrences of items i and j or the total number of co-occur-
rences of these items. It can be shown that the similarity between items i and j calculated
using (1) is proportional to the ratio between on the one hand the observed number of co-
occurrences of items i and j and on the other hand the expected number of co-occurrences
of items i and j under the assumption that occurrences of items i and j are statistically
independent. We refer to Van Eck and Waltman (2009) for an extensive discussion of the
advantages of the association strength over other similarity measures, such as the cosine
and the Jaccard index.
 Step 2: VOS mapping technique
 We now discuss how the VOS mapping technique constructs a map based on the similarity
matrix obtained in Step 1. A more elaborate discussion of the VOS mapping technique,
including an analysis of the relation between the VOS mapping technique and multidi-
mensional scaling, is provided by Van Eck and Waltman (2007a). Some results of an
empirical comparison between the VOS mapping technique and multidimensional scaling
are reported by Van Eck et al. (2008). A simple open source computer program that
implements the VOS mapping technique is available at www.neesjanvaneck.nl/vos/.
Let n denote the number of items to be mapped. The VOS mapping technique constructs
a two-dimensional map in which the items 1,…,n are located in such a way that the
distance between any pair of items i and j reﬂects their similarity sij as accurately as
possible.5 Items that have a high similarity should be located close to each other, while
items that have a low similarity should be located far from each other. The idea of the VOS
mapping technique is to minimize a weighted sum of the squared Euclidean distances
between all pairs of items. The higher the similarity between two items, the higher the
weight of their squared distance in the summation. To avoid trivial maps in which all items
have the same location, the constraint is imposed that the average distance between two
items must be equal to 1. In mathematical notation, the objective function to be minimized
is given by
 5 The VOS mapping technique can also be used to construct maps in more than two dimensions. However,
VOSviewer does not support this. The VOS software available at www.neesjanvaneck.nl/vos/ does support
the construction of maps in more than two dimensions.
 Software survey
531
 123

Vðx1; . . .; xnÞ ¼
X
 i\j
sij xi  xj

2;
ð2Þ
 where the vector xi = (xi1, xi2) denotes the location of item i in a two-dimensional map and
where ||•|| denotes the Euclidean norm. Minimization of the objective function is per-
formed subject to the constraint
 2
nðn  1Þ
 X
 i\j
xi  xj

 ¼ 1:
ð3Þ
 The constrained optimization problem of minimizing (2) subject to (3) is solved numeri-
cally in two steps. The constrained optimization problem is ﬁrst converted into an
unconstrained optimization problem. The latter problem is then solved using a so-called
majorization algorithm. The majorization algorithm used by VOSviewer is a variant of the
SMACOF algorithm described in the multidimensional scaling literature (e.g., Borg and
Groenen 2005). To increase the likelihood of ﬁnding a globally optimal solution, the
majorization algorithm can be run multiple times, each time using a different randomly
generated initial solution.
 Step 3: translation, rotation, and reﬂection
 The optimization problem discussed in Step 2 does not have a unique globally optimal
solution. This is because, if a solution is globally optimal, any translation, rotation, or
reﬂection of the solution is also globally optimal (for a discussion of this issue in the
multidimensional scaling context, see Borg and Groenen 2005). It is of course important
that VOSviewer produces consistent results. The same co-occurrence matrix should
therefore always yield the same map (ignoring differences caused by local optima). To
accomplish this, it is necessary to transform the solution obtained for the optimization
problem discussed in Step 2. VOSviewer applies the following three transformations to the
solution:
 •
Translation. The solution is translated in such a way that it becomes centered at the
origin.
•
Rotation. The solution is rotated in such a way that the variance on the horizontal
dimension is maximized. This transformation is known as principal component
analysis.
•
Reﬂection. If the median of x11,…,xn1 is larger than 0, the solution is reﬂected in the
vertical axis. If the median of x12,…,xn2 is larger than 0, the solution is reﬂected in the
horizontal axis.
 These three transformations are sufﬁcient to ensure that VOSviewer produces consistent
results.
 Density view and cluster density view
 In this section, we discuss the technical implementation of the density view and the cluster
density view. Recall that in VOSviewer the cluster density view is available only if items
have been assigned to clusters.
 532
N. J. van Eck, L. Waltman
 123

Density view
 We ﬁrst consider the density view (see also Van Eck and Waltman 2007b). Similar ideas
can be found in the work of, for example, Eilers and Goeman (2004) and Van Liere and De
Leeuw (2003).
In the density view, the color of a point in a map is determined based on the item density
of the point. Let d denote the average distance between two items, that is,
 d ¼
2
nðn  1Þ
 X
 i\j
xi  xj

:
ð4Þ
 The item density D(x) of a point x = (x1, x2) is then deﬁned as
 DðxÞ ¼
X
n
 i¼1
wiK
x  xi
k
k

ðdhÞ


;
ð5Þ
 where K: [0, ?) ? [0, ?) denotes a kernel function, h [ 0 denotes a parameter called the
kernel width,6 and wi denotes the weight of item i, that is, the total number of occurrences
or co-occurrences of item i. The kernel function K must be non-increasing. VOSviewer
uses a Gaussian kernel function given by
 KðtÞ ¼ exp t2


:
ð6Þ
 It follows from (5) that the item density of a point in a map depends both on the number of
neighboring items and on the weights of these items. The larger the number of neighboring
items and the smaller the distances between these items and the point of interest, the higher
the item density. Also, the higher the weights of the neighboring items, the higher the item
density. We note that the calculation of item densities using (5) is similar to the estimation
of a probability density function using the technique of kernel density estimation (e.g.,
Scott 1992).
Item densities calculated using (5) are translated into colors using a color scheme. By
default, VOSviewer uses a red–green–blue color scheme (see Fig. 5). In this color scheme,
red corresponds with the highest item density and blue corresponds with the lowest item
density.
Finally, we note that the above-described calculation of the color of a point in a map is
performed only for a limited number of points. These points are located on a grid. The
colors of points that do not lie on this grid are obtained through interpolation.
 Cluster density view
 We now consider the cluster density view. In this view, the item density of a point in a map
is calculated separately for each cluster. The item density of a point x for a cluster p,
denoted by Dp(x), is deﬁned as
 DpðxÞ ¼
X
n
 i¼1
IpðiÞwiK
x  xi
k
k
 dh
ð
Þ


;
ð7Þ
 6 By default, VOSviewer uses h = 0.125. This generally seems to work ﬁne. However, if necessary, the
value of h can be changed.
 Software survey
533
 123

where Ip(i) denotes an indicator function that equals 1 if item i belongs to cluster p and that
equals 0 otherwise. Like in the ordinary density view, K denotes the Gaussian kernel
function given by (6).
After calculating item densities, the color of a point in a map is determined in two steps.
Each cluster is associated with a color. In the ﬁrst step, the colors of the clusters are mixed
together. This is done by calculating a weighted average of the colors, where the weight of
a color equals the item density for the corresponding cluster, as given by (7). In the second
step, the color obtained in the ﬁrst step is mixed with the (black or white) background color
of the cluster density view. The proportion in which the two colors are mixed depends on
the total item density of a point, which is given by (5). The lower the total item density of a
point, the closer the color of the point is to the background color.
 Large-scale application of VOSviewer
 To demonstrate VOSviewer’s ability to handle large maps, we use the program to construct
and display a co-citation map of 5,000 major scientiﬁc journals. For earlier studies in
which journal maps of similar size were presented, we refer to Bollen et al. (2009), Boyack
et al. (2005), and Leydesdorff (2004).
The journal co-citation map was constructed as follows. In the Web of Science database,
we collected all citations from documents published in 2007 to documents published
between 1997 and 2006. We only took into account documents of types article, note, and
review. In total, we obtained about 17.5 million citations. It is well known that different
scientiﬁc ﬁelds can have quite different citation practices. To correct for this, we source
normalized all citations. By this we mean that if a document cites m other documents, we
weighed each of the m citations by 1/m (cf. Small and Sweeney 1985). 10,603 journals
turned out to have been cited at least once. Out of these journals, we selected the 5,000
journals with the largest number of source normalized citations. By multiplying the source-
normalized citation matrix for these 5,000 journals with its transpose, we obtained a
source-normalized co-citation matrix. We used this matrix as input for VOSviewer. Based
on the co-citation matrix, VOSviewer constructed the journal co-citation map that is shown
in Fig. 6. The interested reader may want to examine the map in full detail using VOS-
viewer. To do so, visit www.vosviewer.com/journalmap/.
Our journal co-citation map provides an overview of the structure of the scientiﬁc
world. Clusters of related journals can be identiﬁed in the map, and these clusters can be
linked to scientiﬁc ﬁelds. Clusters that are located close to each other in the map indicate
closely related ﬁelds. As can be seen in Fig. 6, the map has a more or less circular
structure. The center of the map is relatively empty. At a global level, the interpretation of
the map is fairly straightforward. The right part of the map covers the medical sciences.
Moving counterclockwise from the medical sciences, the following major ﬁelds can be
identiﬁed: life sciences, chemistry, physics, engineering, mathematics, computer science,
social sciences, and psychology. Psychology is again closely related to the medical sci-
ences, which completes the circular structure of the map.
There seems to be only one earlier study in which distance-based journal maps of similar
size as our map were presented. This study was done by Boyack et al. (2005). Boyack et al.
presented two kinds of journal maps, namely maps based on journal-to-journal citation data
and maps based on journal co-citation data. Comparing the global structure of the maps of
Boyack et al. with the global structure of our map, there turn out to be both some similarities
 534
N. J. van Eck, L. Waltman
 123

and some differences. On the one hand, the way in which major scientiﬁc ﬁelds are located
relative to each other is fairly similar in the maps of Boyack et al. and in our map. On the other
hand, thegeneral shape ofthe maps ofBoyack et al. is quitedifferent fromthegeneral shape of
our map. In the maps of Boyack et al., clusters of journals are located more or less equally
distributed within an almost perfect circle. This seems to be a structure that has been imposed
by the VxOrd mapping technique used by Boyack et al. A disadvantage of this structure is that
in the center of the maps of Boyack et al. different ﬁelds can be identiﬁed that do not really
seem to have much in common. In our map constructed using VOSviewer, we cannot ﬁnd any
indications of a structure that has been imposed by the mapping technique. The general shape
of our map seems to have been determined by the data rather than by the mapping technique
that we used. A noticeable difference between our map and the maps of Boyack et al. is the
relatively empty center of our map. Due to the relatively empty center, ﬁelds between which
there are no strong relations are clearly separated from each other.
To show the importance of VOSviewer’s viewing capabilities, we examine one particular
area in our journal co-citation map in more detail. Suppose that we are interested in the
interface between the sciences and the social sciences. As can be seen in Fig. 6, an area where
the sciences and the social sciences come together is between the ﬁelds of computer science
(Lecture Notes in Computer Science) and economics (American Economic Review). How-
ever, Fig. 6 does not provide any detailed insight into this area. We therefore use VOSviewer
to zoom in on the area. This yields Fig. 7. It is clear that Fig. 7 shows much more detail than
Fig. 6. Unlike Figs. 6, Fig. 7 allows us to exactly identify the ﬁelds that are at the boundary
between the sciences and the social sciences. These ﬁelds include artiﬁcial intelligence and
machine learning (e.g., Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning),
operations research (e.g., European Journal of Operational Research and Management
Science), statistics (e.g., Journal of the American Statistical Association), and transportation
(e.g., Transportation Research Record).7 Fig. 7 illustrates the importance of VOSviewer’s
viewing capabilities. Without the zoom functionality of a computer program such as VOS-
viewer, only the global structure of a map can be inspected and detailed examinations of large
maps such as our journal co-citation map are not possible.
 Fig. 6 Co-citation map of 5,000 major scientiﬁc journals (label view)
 7 Notice that Scientometrics is also visible in Fig. 7 (in the right part of the ﬁgure).
 Software survey
535
 123

Conclusion
 In this paper, we have presented VOSviewer, a freely available computer program for
constructing and viewing bibliometric maps. Unlike programs such as SPSS and Pajek,
which are commonly used for bibliometric mapping, VOSviewer pays special attention to
the graphical representation of bibliometric maps. The functionality of VOSviewer is
especially useful for displaying large bibliometric maps in an easy-to-interpret way.
VOSviewer has been used successfully in various projects carried out by the Centre for
Science and Technology Studies. In future research on bibliometric mapping, we expect to
rely heavily on VOSviewer. By making VOSviewer freely available to the bibliometric
research community, we hope that others will beneﬁt from it as well.
 Acknowledgment
We thank Ed Noyons, Cathelijn Waaijer, and two anonymous referees for valuable
comments on earlier drafts of this paper.
 Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncom-
mercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
 References
 Ahlgren, P., Jarneving, B., & Rousseau, R. (2003). Requirements for a cocitation similarity measure, with
special reference to Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 54(6), 550–560.
Bollen, J., Van de Sompel, H., Hagberg, A., Bettencourt, L., Chute, R., Rodriguez, M. A., et al. (2009).
Clickstream data yields high-resolution maps of science. PLoS ONE, 4(3), 4803.
Borg, I., & Groenen, P. J. F. (2005). Modern multidimensional scaling (2nd ed.). Berlin: Springer.
Bo¨rner, K., Chen, C., & Boyack, K. W. (2003). Visualizing knowledge domains. Annual Review of
Information Science and Technology, 37, 179–255.
Boyack, K. W., Klavans, R., & Bo¨rner, K. (2005). Mapping the backbone of science. Scientometrics, 64(3),
351–374.
Chen, C. (2003). Mapping scientiﬁc frontiers. Berlin: Springer.
 Fig. 7 The area between the ﬁelds of computer science and economics
 536
N. J. van Eck, L. Waltman
 123

Chen, C. (2006). CiteSpace II: Detecting and visualizing emerging trends and transient patterns in scientiﬁc
literature. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 57(3), 359–377.
Davidson, G. S., Wylie, B. N., & Boyack, K. W. (2001). Cluster stability and the use of noise in inter-
pretation of clustering. In Proceedings of the IEEE symposium on information visualization 2001, pp.
23–30.
de Moya-Anego´n, F., Vargas-Quesada, B., Chinchilla-Rodrı´guez, Z., Corera-A´ lvarez, E., Munoz-Ferna´ndez,
F. J., & Herrero-Solana, V. (2007). Visualizing the marrow of science. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology, 58(14), 2167–2179.
De Nooy, W., Mrvar, A., & Batagelj, V. (2005). Exploratory social network analysis with Pajek. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Eilers, P. H. C., & Goeman, J. J. (2004). Enhancing scatterplots with smoothed densities. Bioinformatics,
20(5), 623–628.
Fruchterman, T. M. J., & Reingold, E. M. (1991). Graph drawing by force-directed placement. Software:
Practice and Experience, 21(11), 1129–1164.
Garﬁeld, E. (2009). From the science of science to Scientometrics visualizing the history of science with
HistCite software. Journal of Informetrics, 3(3), 173–179.
Huisman, M., & Van Duijn, M. A. J. (2005). Software for social network analysis. In J. Scott, S. Wasserman,
& P. J. Carrington (Eds.), Models and methods in social network analysis (pp. 270–316). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Kamada, T., & Kawai, S. (1989). An algorithm for drawing general undirected graphs. Information Pro-
cessing Letters, 31(1), 7–15.
Klavans, R., & Boyack, K. W. (2006a). Identifying a better measure of relatedness for mapping science.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 57(2), 251–263.
Klavans, R., & Boyack, K. W. (2006b). Quantitative evaluation of large maps of science. Scientometrics,
68(3), 475–499.
Kopcsa, A., & Schiebel, E. (1998). Science and technology mapping: A new iteration model for representing
multidimensional relationships. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 49(1), 7–17.
Leydesdorff, L. (2004). Clusters and maps of science journals based on bi-connected graphs in Journal
Citation Reports. Journal of Documentation, 60(4), 371–427.
Leydesdorff, L., & Rafols, I. (2009). A global map of science based on the ISI subject categories. Journal of
the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 60(2), 348–362.
Peters, H. P. F., & Van Raan, A. F. J. (1993). Co-word-based science maps of chemical engineering. Part I:
Representations by direct multidimensional scaling. Research Policy, 22(1), 23–45.
Rip, A., & Courtial, J.-P. (1984). Co-word maps of biotechnology: An example of cognitive scientometrics.
Scientometrics, 6(6), 381–400.
Schvaneveldt, R. W. (Ed.). (1990). Pathﬁnder associative networks. Westport: Ablex.
Schvaneveldt, R. W., Dearholt, D. W., & Durso, F. T. (1988). Graph theoretic foundations of pathﬁnder
networks. Computers and Mathematics with Applications, 15(4), 337–345.
Scott, D. W. (1992). Multivariate density estimation. London: Wiley.
Skupin, A. (2004). The world of geography: Visualizing a knowledge domain with cartographic means.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 101(Suppl 1), 5274–5278.
Small, H., & Sweeney, E. (1985). Clustering the Science Citation Index using co-citations. I. A comparison
of methods. Scientometrics, 7(3–6), 391–409.
Van Eck, N. J., & Waltman, L. (2007a). VOS: A new method for visualizing similarities between objects. In
H.-J. Lenz & R. Decker (Eds.), Advances in data analysis: Proceedings of the 30th annual conference
of the German Classiﬁcation Society (pp. 299–306). Heidelberg: Springer.
Van Eck, N. J., & Waltman, L. (2007b). Bibliometric mapping of the computational intelligence ﬁeld.
International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Systems, 15(5), 625–645.
Van Eck, N. J., & Waltman, L. (2009). How to normalize cooccurrence data? An analysis of some well-
known similarity measures. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
60(8), 1635–1651.
Van Eck, N. J., Waltman, L., Dekker, R., & Van den Berg, J. (2008). An experimental comparison of
bibliometric mapping techniques. Paper presented at the 10th International Conference on Science and
Technology Indicators, Vienna.
Van Eck, N. J., Waltman, L., Noyons, E. C. M., & Buter, R. K. (in press). Automatic term identiﬁcation for
bibliometric mapping. Scientometrics.
Van Eck, N. J., Waltman, L., Van den Berg, J., & Kaymak, U. (2006). Visualizing the computational
intelligence ﬁeld. IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine, 1(4), 6–10.
Van Liere, R., & De Leeuw, W. (2003). GraphSplatting: Visualizing graphs as continuous ﬁelds. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 9(2), 206–212.
 Software survey
537
 123

Vargas-Quesada, B., & de Moya-Anego´n, F. (2007). Visualizing the structure of science. New York:
Springer.
White, H. D. (2003). Pathﬁnder networks and author cocitation analysis: A remapping of paradigmatic
information scientists. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 54(5),
423–434.
Zitt, M., Bassecoulard, E., & Okubo, Y. (2000). Shadows of the past in international cooperation:
Collaboration proﬁles of the top ﬁve producers of science. Scientometrics, 47(3), 627–657.
 538
N. J. van Eck, L. Waltman
 123