Skip to main content
 Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version
with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we
recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off
compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to
ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles
and JavaScript.
 Advertisement
 [image]
 [image]
 • View all journals
 • 
Search
• Log in
 • Content Explore content
• About the journal
• Publish with us
 • Sign up for alerts
• RSS feed
 1. nature 
2. cellular & molecular immunology 
3. review articles 
4. article
 CAR-T and CAR-NK as cellular cancer immunotherapy for solid
tumors
 Download PDF 
Download PDF 
 Show authors

• Review Article
• Open access
• Published: 12 August 2024
 CAR-T and CAR-NK as cellular
cancer immunotherapy for
solid tumors
 • Lei Peng
1,2 na1,
• Giacomo Sferruzza1,2 na1,
• Luojia Yang1,2,3,4 na1,
• Liqun Zhou1,2,3,5 &
• …
 • Sidi Chen
  ORCID:
orcid.org/0000-0002-3819-50051,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11 
 Cellular & Molecular Immunology volume 21, pages 1089–1108
(2024)Cite this article
 • 80k Accesses
 • 234 Citations
 • 20 Altmetric
 • Metrics details
 Subjects
 • Cancer therapy
• Immunotherapy
• Tumour immunology
 Abstract
 In the past decade, chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cell therapy

has emerged as a promising immunotherapeutic approach for
combating cancers, demonstrating remarkable efficacy in relapsed/
refractory hematological malignancies in both pediatric and adult
patients. CAR-natural killer (CAR-NK) cell complements CAR-T cell
therapy by offering several distinct advantages. CAR-NK cells do not
require HLA compatibility and exhibit low safety concerns.
Moreover, CAR-NK cells are conducive to “off-the-shelf”
therapeutics, providing significant logistic advantages over CAR-T
cells. Both CAR-T and CAR-NK cells have shown consistent and
promising results in hematological malignancies. However, their
efficacy against solid tumors remains limited due to various
obstacles including limited tumor trafficking and infiltration, as
well as an immuno-suppressive tumor microenvironment. In this
review, we discuss the recent advances and current challenges of
CAR-T and CAR-NK cell immunotherapies, with a specific focus on
the obstacles to their application in solid tumors. We also analyze in
depth the advantages and drawbacks of CAR-NK cells compared to
CAR-T cells and highlight CAR-NK CAR optimization. Finally, we
explore future perspectives of these adoptive immunotherapies,
highlighting the increasing contribution of cutting-edge
biotechnological tools in shaping the next generation of cellular
immunotherapy.
 Similar content being viewed by others
 [image]
 Forks in the road for CAR T and CAR NK cell cancer
therapies
 Article 27 November 2023
[image]
 Emerging roles of CAR-NK cell therapies in tumor
immunotherapy: current status and future directions
 Article Open access 10 July 2024
[image]

CAR-T cell therapy: current limitations and potential
strategies
 Article Open access 06 April 2021
 Introduction
 Immunotherapy, which aims to stimulate the immune system to
eradicate cancer, has recently revolutionized cancer treatment and
constitutes the fourth cornerstone of cancer therapy alongside
surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy [1, 2]. Current cancer
immunotherapy research encompasses a broad range of approaches,
including antibodies, vaccines, cytokines, oncolytic viruses, bi-
specific molecules, and cellular therapies [3, 4]. Among these,
immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) and adoptive cell therapy
(ACT) have emerged as the most successful immunotherapy
strategies for cancer treatment [5,6,7,8,9]. ICIs, which block
immune checkpoints, have achieved significant tumor regression
and changed standards of care for a variety of solid tumor
malignancies, including melanoma, lung cancer, and head and neck
cancer [5, 10, 11]. However, primary and acquired resistance
remains common due to the scarcity of anti-tumor T cells and
impaired memory T cells.
 Unlike small molecule drugs or antibodies, cells have the potential
to sense and dynamically respond to diseases [12]. Cellular
immunotherapy, which involves the transfer of modified immune
cells back into the patient, has rapidly grown in clinical
investigation and achieved significant success in hematologic
malignancies, though its use in solid tumor malignancies is still in
its early stages [2, 13].
 In this review, we explore the potential of CAR-T and CAR-NK cells,
along with the current limitations of these treatment modalities
against cancer, especially solid tumors. We present an overview of
the engineering strategies implemented in recent years to address
the main challenges limiting the CAR-T and CAR-NK cell
effectiveness, showcasing the broad versatility of cellular
immunotherapy. Finally, we highlight the potential advantages and

limitations of CAR-NK cells over CAR-T cells and outline the future
perspectives of these cancer therapies.
 CAR-T cell cancer therapy
 T cells, as a key component of the adaptive immune system, can be
divided into different subgroups based on function, co-receptor
expression (CD4 or CD8), trafficking, metabolism, and lifespan,
playing a crucial role in fighting cancer due to their potent ability
to recognize and eliminate cancerous cells [14]. Consequently, T
cells have emerged as primary candidates for cancer
immunotherapy. However, in immunocompetent patients, tumors
often undergo “cancer immunoediting”, enabling them to evade
cellular immunity and establish a microenvironment that facilitates
tumor outgrowth [15]. Therefore, effective ACT needs to overcome
the tumor immune escape mechanisms, including T cell dysfunction
[16,17,18] and the absence of tumor-associated antigens (TAA),
such as lineage antigens in hematological malignancies. This can be
achieved by expanding and activating T cells ex vivo or genetically
engineering them to boost their cancer-fighting capabilities.
 Currently, there are three major modalities of autologous T cell
immunotherapy: tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) therapy,
genetically engineered T cell receptors T (TCR-T) cell therapy, and
CAR-T cell therapy [19]. TIL therapy, which involves expanding a
heterogeneous population of endogenous T cells with a pool of
native TCRs from a harvested tumor, has been approved by the FDA
for the treatment of advanced melanoma (FDA news release on
2/16/2024). This strategy is particularly promising for “hot
tumors”, characterized by a tumor microenvironment (TME)
enriched with TILs, indicating a preexisting immune response [20].
TCR-T cell therapy involves expanding T cells with genetically
encoded TCRs directed toward specific antigen targets. In contrast,
CAR-T cell therapy involves expanding genetically engineered T
cells equipped with synthetic receptors (CARs) that recognize
specific antigens on cancer cells [21]. Additionally, more
sophisticated engineered T cells, such as synthetic TCR and antigen
receptor (STAR-T) [22] and HLA-independent T cell receptors (HIT)
[23], are also on the horizon.

The recognition and killing of cancer cells by T cells rely on
canonical TCR signaling. Initially, T cells are primed by peptide
antigens presented by major histocompatibility complex (MHC),
which activates a series of downstream signals to facilitate cancer
killing [16] (Fig. 1A). In contrast, CARs were first proposed and
invented by Eshhar et al. to enable T cell cytotoxicity independent
of MHC restriction, allowing for target-specific cytotoxicity and
broader therapeutic applicability [24]. The first generation of CARs
consists of an extracellular single-chain variable fragment (scFv)
that recognizes specific antigens, linked via a hinge and
transmembrane (TM) domain to a C-terminal CD3ζ activation
domain (Fig. 1B). These antibody-based antigen receptors redirect
the inherent cytotoxic nature of T cells to kill cancer cells in an
antigen-specific manner.
 Fig. 1
[image]
 Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) construct. A When a T cell
encounters antigen-presenting cells or tumor cells, T cell receptor
(TCR) and CD3 complex, together with CD4 or CD8, will recognize
MHC complex-presented peptides, then trigger TCR signaling
cascade, leading to T cell activation. B The first-generation CAR
majorly involves two parts: scFv at the extracellular part and CD3ζ
chain at the intracellular part. ScFv domain can recognize tumor
surface antigens, and then the CD3ζ chain will directly activate T
cells. The second-generation CAR incorporated a co-stimulation
domain, either 4-1BB or CD28 signaling domain. The third-
generation CAR has both 4-1BB and CD28 signaling domains. C
Differences of antigen-binding domain, hinge region,
transmembrane region, co-stimulatory domain, and T cell activation
domain of six FDA-approved CAR-T products. Those products are
used to treat B-cell lymphoma, B-cell leukemia, and multiple
myeloma. APC antigen-presenting cell, MHC major
histocompatibility complex, TCR-T cell receptor, scFv single-chain
variable fragment
 Full size image
 However, the first generation of CAR-T cells, which relied solely on

the CD3 ζ-chain to simulate TCR signaling, exhibited limited
proliferation, engraftment, and cytotoxicity, resulting in
unsatisfactory clinical efficacy. Subsequent modifications to CAR
molecules led to the development of second and third-generation
CAR-T cells, which included one (second-generation) or two (third-
generation) intracellular co-stimulatory (ICOS) domains upstream of
CD3ζ (Fig. 1B) [25]. These enhancements improved CAR-T cell
cytotoxicity, cytokine production, and proliferation in response to
target stimulation.
 Currently, there are six FDA-approved CAR agents targeting CD19
or BCMA for hematological malignancies [26]. All approved CAR
products employ a second-generation CAR construct, consisting of
an antigen-binding domain, a hinge region, a TM region, a co-
stimulatory domain (CD28 or 4-1BB), and a T cell activation
domain (Fig. 1C). These CAR-T cell therapies have achieved durable
remission in many patients with hematological malignancies. In
pivotal trials, CD19-CAR therapy outperformed the standard of care
(SOC) as a second-line treatment for large B-cell lymphoma and has
shown high effectiveness as a first-line therapy. BCMA-CAR therapy
has demonstrated high response rates in multiple myeloma [27].
Recently, ongoing clinical trials conducted by major manufacturer
pharmaceutical companies are comparing the efficacy of CAR-T
cells to SOCs, aiming to introduce them to earlier lines of treatment
for multiple myeloma. Such success has ushered in the era of cell
therapy for hematological diseases.
 Challenges in CAR-T cell therapy for solid tumors
 Substantial attention and efforts have been devoted in recent years
to improve CAR-T cell therapy for solid tumors. As of June 2024,
data from ClinicalTrials.gov indicate a total number of 405 CAR-T
cell clinical trials targeting solid tumors with varying statuses (29
completed, 30 active/not recruiting, 179 actively recruiting or
enrolling by invitation, 90 with unknown status, 39 suspended/
terminated/withdrawn, and 38 not yet recruiting). Despite showing
signs of activity in solid tumors, outcomes from clinical trials have
been disappointing to date, with no consistently high rates of
durable responses observed [26].

The exact reasons why CAR-T cells have underperformed in solid
tumors remain unclear, primarily due to insufficient biological
information to evaluate key aspects of therapy. Most clinical studies
evaluating CAR-T cells in solid tumors have predominantly reported
generic tumor response parameters and the presence/persistence of
CAR-T cells in peripheral blood (PB) [28, 29]. However, pivotal
details regarding CAR-T cell infiltration, phenotype, and
interactions with the TME are largely lacking, as they require post-
infusion bioptic data.
 As an illustrative example, the application of CAR-T cells in patients
affected by high-grade glioma can be cited. Currently, eleven single
report or Phase I clinical trials have been performed
[30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40], including ~130 patients.
However, post-infusion pathological data have only been obtained
for 11 patients, always following clinical-driven surgical indications
or post-mortem. These data suggest several important findings: (1)
CAR-T cells patchy infiltrate the tumor when administrated
intravenously [38], (2) their persistence appears to be limited [30,
31, 38], and (3) the therapy administration is followed by an
upregulation of immuno-suppressive signals in TME [38].
Furthermore, both pathological data and liquid biopsy samples
acquired in these trials have highlighted the well-known ability of
glioblastoma in antigen escaping. However, the non-systematic
acquisition of the pathological data precludes speculation on the
mechanistic series events that allow tumor immunoescape [41].
 Without this, we rely solely on reasonable considerations obtained
from solid tumor biology or inferences coming from mouse models.
In fact, solid cancers present unique challenges for CAR-T therapy.
First, unlike B-cell malignancies, which possess several lineage-
specific epitopes, cells within most of the solid tumors are
heterogeneous [42,43,44]. Additionally, even when a tumor antigen
is shared with healthy cells, in hematological tumors it can be
feasible to sacrifice the entire antigen-positive lineage to eradicate
the cancer. This is because the intrinsic characteristic of the bone
marrow tissue, that can be ablated, cytoreducted, stimulated with
growth factors, and even transplanted allowing the survival of the
patient. In contrast, most solid tumors originate from tissues where
a widespread autoimmune cross-reaction would be life-threatening.

For this reason, identifying tumor-specific antigens that can be
targeted by CAR-T cells has proven difficult. Although antigens that
are overexpressed in tumors or TAA have been chosen, there are
non-negligible levels of antigen expression in healthy tissues,
raising concerns about toxicity issues [43, 45]. Second, fibrotic
tumor stroma of solid tumor, which is comprised of extracellular
matrix (ECM) and cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), along with
the abnormal vasculature at the tumor site, create physical barriers
that impede CAR-T cell infiltration and penetration into the tumor
[46,47,48]. Additionally, the immuno-suppressive TME of solid
tumor characterized by numerous suppressive immune cells such as
regulatory T cells (Tregs) and myeloid-derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs), as well as immuno-suppressive ligands and agents such as
programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PD-L1), TGF-β, and adenosine,
further hinder CAR-T cell cytotoxic activity, proliferation, and
persistence in combating solid tumors [43, 49] (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2
[image]
 Challenges of CAR-T faces and engineering strategies to overcome
solid tumor. Treating solid tumors poses three major challenges for
CAR-T cells: tumor heterogeneity, tumor infiltration, and inhibitory
tumor microenvironment (TME). There are two types of tumor
antigens, tumor-specific antigen (TSA) which only expresses in
tumor cells, and tumor-associated antigen (TAA) which can be
expressed in normal cells as well. Meanwhile, tumor cells may
express tumor antigens at different levels as well. To overcome
heterogeneity, efforts have been made to engineer CARs with two
different scFvs (TanCAR) or express two different CARs recognizing
different antigens (Bi-specific CAR). Bi-specific T cell engager can
link tumor antigen and CD3 complex to initiate T cell tumor killing.
Solid tumor also has physical barriers and extracellular matrix that
limit CAR-T cell infiltration. To overcome this challenge,
researchers have tried local delivery of CAR-T cells, engineering
chemokine receptor-expressing CAR, FAP-targeting CAR, or EMC
modifying CAR-T or oncolytic virus. Immune suppressive TME is
another big challenge which consists of inhibitory immune cell
infiltration, immune suppressive factors such as TGF-β, as well as
chemical environment alterations. Researchers have tried to block

immune checkpoints such as PD-1, using genetic deletion,
administration of anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies, or T cell autocrine
antibodies. Efforts have also been made to engineer cytokine-
arming or cytokine receptor-expressing CAR, replace inhibitory
domains with activation domains in PD-1 or TGF-β as switch
receptor, and delete T cell internal negative regulators or over-
express T cell function boosters
 Full size image
 Engineering strategies to improve CAR-T cell therapy
for solid tumor
 Combating antigen heterogeneity in solid tumor
 Numerous strategies have been explored to address the antigen
heterogeneity of solid tumors with the primary focus on achieving
multi-target targeting (Fig. 2). One approach involves combinatorial
strategies, such as sequential or combination treatments involving
different CAR-T cell products. By concurrently targeting multiple
antigens, this strategy aims to mitigate antigen escape phenomena
commonly associated with CAR-T cell therapy. This strategy has
already been demonstrated to be clinically safe and feasible in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma [50, 51] and may represent a
promising approach also in solid tumors. Another innovative
avenue is the development of multi-target CAR-T cells, achieved
through the incorporation of two distinct CAR constructs into T
cells or the utilization of bi-specific or Tandem (TanCAR) CAR-T
cells. For instance, Muhammad et al. synthesized a novel TanCAR,
comprising a tandem arrangement of IL13 and EphA2 single-chain
variable fragments (scFv), demonstrating that the IL13-anti-EphA2
TanCAR exhibited markedly stronger anti-tumor efficacy compared
to single CAR-T cells, both in vitro and in vivo [52].
 Additional modification of CAR-T cells has been explored to
enhance their targeting capabilities. One such strategy involves
enabling CAR-T cells to secrete bi-specific T cell engagers (BiTEs)
which engage with additional targets, thereby augmenting their
anti-tumor efficacy. For example, Wing et al. designed folate
receptor alpha (FR-α) targeting T cell engager CAR-T cells (anti-

EGFR BiTEs) and showed that anti-EGFR BiTEs increased the anti-
tumor efficacy of anti-EGFR CAR-T cells in a mouse model of
glioblastoma [53]. Moreover, in a recent clinical trial, CARv3-
TEAM-E T cells were evaluated in glioblastoma expressing the
epidermal growth factor receptor variant III (EGFRv3). These cells
were designed to recognize both this tumor-specific antigen, as well
as the wild-type EGFR protein, through the secretion of a T cell-
engaging antibody molecule (TEAM) [40]. In this way, TEAM-E T
cells provide a potential solution to overcome the loss of EGFR
variant III observed in glioblastoma after target immunotherapies
like peptide vaccination [54] or CAR-T cells [38]. This Phase 1 trial
has shown the feasibility and relative safety of the intracranial
injection of the TEAM-E T cells. All of the three patients enrolled in
the trial have shown a promising initial radiological response, albeit
transient.
 Furthermore, universal CARs are developed to realize multiple
antigen targeting. Adapter elements serve as key components to
enable the targeting of multiple antigens with a common CAR-T cell
population. Noteworthy examples include avidin-linked CAR-T
cells, leveraging the binding affinity between avidin and biotin to
recognize multiple targets [55]. Similarly, approaches involving the
engineering of CAR-T cells with Fcγ receptors, enabling recognition
of the common Fc domain of antibodies, have been investigated to
achieve multi-antigen targeting [56]. These strategies represent
promising advancements in the field of CAR-T cell therapy, offering
innovative solutions to overcome challenges associated with tumor
heterogeneity and antigen escape.
 Lastly, CAR-T cell therapy can be combined with vaccination
against the target antigen recognized by the CAR. Once expressed
by antigen-presenting cells, the target is able not only to promote
CAR-T cell expansion and maturation in a memory phenotype [57]
but also to engage the host immune cells to mount a response
against different antigens of the same target [58].
 This mechanism, known as epitope spreading, confers robustness to
the immunotherapy while simultaneously addressing pre-treatment
antigen heterogeneity and antigen loss induced by the treatment.
Evaluated in Phase I/II clinical trial in advanced solid tumors, the

mRNA CAR-T cell-amplifying vaccine showed no alteration of the
safety profile of the CLDN-6 specific CAR-T cells [59]. Furthermore,
despite this first publication being incomplete due to an amendment
to the protocol, this trial has shown encouraging results in terms of
disease control in a group of refractory tumors.
 Increasing trafficking and infiltration into solid tumors
 To combat cancer cells, CAR-T cells are requisite to contact and
stimulated by its cognate antigens on tumors. Leveraging various
cytokine and chemokine receptors capable of mediating immune
cell trafficking, researchers have endeavored to engineer CAR-T
cells to improve their trafficking and infiltration into solid tumors
[60, 61] (Fig. 2). Jin et al. discovered significant amounts of IL-8,
CXCL1, and CXCL2 were released from tumors. They engineered
CARs modified with IL-8 receptors, CXCR1, and CXCR2,
demonstrating that these modified CARs could be guided to migrate
into tumors, inducing an enhanced anti-tumor response in solid
tumors [62]. Moreover, the activation of CC-chemokine ligand 17
(CCL17) and CCL22, secreted by Reed–Sternberg cells of Hodgkin
lymphoma (HL), activated their receptor CC-chemokine receptor 4
(CCR4) expressed T helper cells and Tregs [63]. Savoldo’s group
showed that CD30 CAR-T cells co-expressing CCR4
(CCR4.CD30.CAR-T cells) exhibited improved tumor homing and
anti-lymphoma activity compared to CD30 CAR-T cells lacking
CCR4 expression [64]. Later on, data from a clinical trial
(NCT03602157) further showed CCR4.CD30. CAR-T cells’
promising efficacy in patients with relapsed/refractory (r/r)
classical HL, and displayed enhanced trafficking to the skin,
rendering them more effective in CD30+ cutaneous T cell
lymphomas [65]. Similarly, modifying CAR-T cells with the CCL2
cognate receptor CCR2b resulted in a 10-fold increase in infiltration
of anti-GD2 CAR-T cells into neuroblastoma xenograft tumors and a
12-fold increase in infiltration into mesothelioma xenografts
compared to unmodified CAR-T cells [66, 67]. Li et al. enhanced
CAR-T cells by co-expressing IL-7 and CCR2b, demonstrating
improved CAR-T cell survival and infiltration in glioblastoma and
melanoma [68]. CCR2b-anti MSLN CAR-T cells exhibited enhanced
migration and infiltration into tumor tissue, displaying superior
anti-tumor efficacy, particularly in non-small-cell lung carcinoma

[69]. In recent years, novel cytokine and chemokine receptors have
been investigated in preclinical studies to improve CAR-T cell
infiltration into tumors. For instance, CLDN18.2-specific IL-7 and
CCL21 co-expressing CLDN18.2-specific cytokines (7 × 21 CAR-T
cells) enhanced proliferation and chemotaxis of CAR-T cells across
various cancer models such as PANC02 (pancreatic cancer), E0771-
A2 (breast cancer), and Hepa1-6-A2 (liver cancer) [70].
Additionally, IL-7 and CCL19 expressing anti-GM2 CAR-T cells
exhibited abundant CAR-T cell infiltration and strong therapeutic
effects in GM2-positive solid cancers in xenograft models [71].
Trinh et al. designed a CX3CR1 overexpressing (NKG2D) CAR-T
expression and found that CAR-T cells infiltrated tumors at higher
rates than control-activated T cells or IL-15-overexpressing NKG2D
CAR-T cells in a liver cancer model [72].
 In clinical settings, regional delivery of CAR-T cells into tumors at
various anatomical sites, including the brain [32], breast [73],
pleura, and liver [74] has emerged as an alternative delivery
strategy to enhance CAR-T cell localization in tumors. Prapa et al.
compared intracerebral versus intravenous anti-GD2 CAR-T
injections to treat glioblastoma, revealing that the intracerebral
route significantly increased survival time in a dose-dependent
manner without side effects [75]. Clinical data from the Phase 1b
HITM-SIR trial demonstrated the safety and efficacy of CAR-T cell
hepatic artery infusions therapy, which was not associated with
severe cytokine release syndrome (CRS) or neurotoxicity [76, 77].
 However, solid TMEs present physical barriers that CAR-T cells
must overcome to penetrate tumors. One such barrier is the
protease fibroblast activation protein (FAP), expressed by many
tumor-associated stromal fibroblasts, which plays a crucial role in
remodeling the tumor ECM. Targeting FAP-expressing stromal cells
with CAR-T cells has been explored to facilitate immune cell
infiltration into tumors. Nevertheless, results from studies are
contradictory. While some studies reported limited effects on tumor
progression and adverse effects on bone marrow stromal cells [78],
others demonstrated decreased tumor growth without severe
toxicities when combined with vaccines [79].
 Apart from FAP targeting, engineering CAR-T cells to secrete ECM-

modifying enzymes is another approach to enhance CAR-T cell
penetration into solid tumors. For instance, anti-GD2 CAR-T cells
engineered to degrade heparin sulfate proteoglycans in the ECM
through heparinase expression exhibited improved tumor
infiltration and prolonged survival compared to CAR-T cells lacking
heparinase expression [80]. Other ECM-degrading enzymes are also
under exploration for their potential role in CAR-T cell therapy.
Recently, Wang et al. constructed a recombinant oncolytic vaccinia
virus encoding hyaluronidase to degrade hyaluronic acid, which
often impedes intratumoral dissemination of anti-tumor drugs.
Their findings demonstrated increased intratumoral dissemination
of chemo drugs, immune cell infiltration, and activation of CD8+ T
cells [81]. While ECM modification presents an exciting frontier in
CAR-T cell therapy for solid tumors, caution is warranted due to the
complicated and currently unpredictable effects of ECM-modifying
enzymes. Clinical trials have shown mixed results, indicating the
need for further investigation into the efficacy and toxicity profile
of these approaches. Additionally, there are concerns regarding
potential thromboembolic events associated with ECM modification,
as evidenced by the administration of low molecular weight heparin
supplementation to mitigate risks in clinical trials [82, 83].
 In summary, while significant strides have been made in enhancing
CAR-T cell trafficking and infiltration into solid tumors, ongoing
research is essential to further understand the complexities of the
TME and optimize therapeutic strategies for improved efficacy and
safety in clinical settings.
 Blocking CAR-T cell dysfunction
 Once located in the tumor, CAR-T cells must contend with direct
inhibitory signals present in the TME. Multiple inhibitory signals,
including the expression of PD-1 and other inhibitory receptors,
have been identified as mechanisms of CAR-T cell dysfunction [84].
Interfering with checkpoint signal pathways is a common approach
to alleviate CAR-T cell dysfunction and restore their anti-tumor
efficacy [85, 86] (Fig. 2). A well-known inhibitory pathway is the
PD-1–PD-L1 axis. PD-1 is an immune checkpoint receptor expressed
in T cells. When PD-1 is bound by its ligand PD-L1 expressed on
tumor cells as well as other cell types, it induces T cells to adopt an

exhausted phenotype [87]. Combinational therapy of PD-1 antibody
checkpoint blockade and CAR-T cells showed increased efficacy of
CAR-T cell therapy in both preclinical and clinical settings [88].
Various groups have demonstrated increased efficacy of CAR-T cell
therapy with the coadministration of antibodies that inhibit the
PD-1 pathway in preclinical models [89, 90]. Jaspers et al. found
that anti-PD-1 blockade increased memory phenotype, reduced
exhaustion, and induced durable responses of anti-DLL3 CAR-T cells
in multiple SCLC models [91]. Similarly, a Phase I clinical showed
that anti-mesothelin CAR-T cells showed therapeutic effects in
patients with malignant pleural disease, in combination with the
anti-PD-1 agent pembrolizumab [92]. Instead of using CAR-T cells
in combination with established ICIs, researchers also employed
genetic engineering strategies to disrupt checkpoint pathways.
Wang et al. generated PD-1 and TCR deficient mesothelin-specific
CAR-T (MPTK-CAR-T) cells using clustered regularly interspaced
short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) technology and evaluated them
in a dose-escalation clinical study [93]. No dose-limiting toxicity or
unexpected adverse events were observed in any of the 15 patients.
The best overall response was stable disease (2/15 patients) [93].
Agarwal et al. found that CRISPR-mediated deletion of CTLA4
permitted unopposed CD28 signaling and maintenance of CAR
expression on the T cell surface under the condition of high antigen
load [94]. CTLA4 deficiency in CAR-T cells improved proliferation
and anti-tumor efficacy in preclinical models of leukemia and
myeloma, which rescued the function of T cells from patients with
leukemia that previously failed CAR-T cell treatment [94]. 4-1BB-
based CAR-T cells armed with autocrine PD-L1 scFv antibody
effectively reversed exhaustion and enhanced the anti-tumor
immune response in solid tumors and hematologic malignancies by
blocking the PD-1/PD-L1 signaling [95]. A similar study showed
that mesothelin-targeting CAR-T cells secreting single-chain trimeric
4-1BB ligand fused to anti-PD-1 scFv (αPD1-41BBL) exhibited
reduced inhibitory receptor upregulation; enhanced persistence,
proliferation, and memory status; and augmented anti-solid tumor
efficacy [96].
 In the TME, various immuno-suppressive molecules, such as
adenosine and TGF-β, produced by immuno-suppressive immune
cells like Tregs and MDSCs, impose inhibitory roles on CAR-T cells

[97]. CAR-T cells have been engineered to counteract the actions of
adenosine, with CRISPR-mediated deletion of the adenosine A2A
receptor enhancing CAR-T cell efficacy in several studies [65, 98].
Similarly, reducing adenosine levels through overexpression of
adenosine deaminase has induced stemness and enhanced CAR-T
functionality [99]. TGF-β inhibition via CRISPR or small molecule
blockers such as LY2157299 has been shown to promote the long-
term efficacy of CAR-T cells against solid tumors [93, 100].
Inactivation of TGF-β signaling in CAR-T cells through dominant-
negative TGF-β receptor II has achieved optimistic preclinical and
clinical results against solid tumors [101].
 Another effective method to modify inhibitory signals in CAR-T
cells is to express decoy or switch cytokine receptors, which
converts inhibitory signals present in the TME into pro-
inflammatory signals. For instance, switch receptors with chimeric
signaling domains can convert TGF-β signals or PD-1/PD-L1
inhibitor signals through the engagement of modified receptors to
signal through co-stimulatory domains such as 4-1BB or IL-12 [102,
103]. Similarly, cytokine receptors containing the extracellular
domain of the IL-4 receptor fused with the endodomain of the IL-7
receptor can translate inhibitory IL-4 signals into activating IL-7
signals in T cells and CAR-T cells [104]. Another approach involves
fusing the IL-4 receptor extracellular domain with the shared β-
subunit of the IL-2 and IL-15 receptors, thereby converting
inhibitory IL-4 signals into homeostatic IL-7, IL-2, or IL-15 signals
[105]. These strategies represent innovative approaches to mitigate
inhibitory signals present in the TME, thereby enhancing CAR-T cell
efficacy in combating solid tumors.
 Enhancing CAR-T cell anti-tumor function with
immunostimulatory signals
 An alternative strategy to enable CAR-T cells to overcome
inhibitory signals in the TME involves engineering CAR-T cells with
immunostimulatory signals to achieve enhanced anti-tumor
functions (Fig. 2). The limited success of early iteration CAR-T cell
designs lacking co-stimulation underscores the importance of
incorporating a co-stimulatory domain. Currently, all CAR-T cells in
clinical use contain either a CD28 or 4-1BB co-stimulatory domain

[27]. Preclinical investigations are exploring the utility of including
additional co-stimulatory molecules such as ICOS, OX40, and CD27,
or various combinations of multiple co-stimulatory domains in
third- and fourth-generation CAR constructs [106,107,108,109].
ICOS and 4-1BB co-stimulation have been shown to dramatically
enhance CAR-T cell persistence [110]. Moreno-Cortes et al.
generated ICOS.OX40 tandem co-stimulated anti-ROR1 CAR-T cells,
demonstrating enhanced in vitro and in vivo cytotoxicity and
prolonged persistence [111].
 Augmenting CAR-T cells to secrete stimulatory cytokines represents
another approach to enhancing CAR-T cell function. These
“armored” CAR-T cells redirected for universal cytokine-mediated
killing (TRUCKS) encode not only a CAR but also a cytokine,
interleukin, pro-inflammatory ligand, or chemokine to counteract
the immuno-suppressive microenvironment prevalent in most solid
tumors [112,113,114,115]. Cytokines such as IL-12, IL-18, or IL-15
are commonly used to empower CAR-T cells with better in vivo
proliferation, survival, and persistence. For example, IL-12 signaling
facilitates CAR-T cell-mediated IFNγ production, which is necessary
for tumor cell killing, and intratumoral IL-12 delivery enhances
CAR-T cell immunotherapy in preclinical models of glioblastoma
[116]. Lee et al. engineered membrane-bound IL-12 (mbIL12) in
CAR-T cells, leading to increased proliferative capacity, better
survival, and greater cytotoxicity compared to unarmored CAR-T
cells, promoting durable anti-tumor responses in mice [117]. IL-18
augmented IFN-gamma secretion and proliferation of T cells
activated by the endogenous TCR, enhancing anti-tumor activity
[118]. Furthermore, IL-15 plays a significant role in T cell
proliferation and persistence [45, 119, 120]. CAR-T cells armored
with several other cytokines, such as IL-10 or IL-4/IL-15-based
inverted cytokine receptors, have also shown significantly enhanced
efficacy against solid tumors in preclinical models [121, 122].
 Enhancing CAR-T cell function with endogenous genetic
regulators
 Moreover, with the advancement of CRISPR screens and single-cell
sequencing technologies, various previously unknown or
understudied T cell genetic regulators, such as suppressors and

boosters, have been discovered recently [123, 124]. Genetic
deletion of T cell negative regulators or overexpression of T cell
boosters are powerful strategies to enhance the fundamental
properties of T cells and thereby CAR-T cell anti-tumor functions.
For instance, knockout of Regnase-1 promotes TCF-1 expression to
enhance CAR-T cell expansion and memory-like cell formation,
reduce exhaustion, and support long-term CAR-T cell persistence
[125]. Dong et al. discovered that RNA helicase DHX37 knockout
enhanced the efficacy of CD8+ T cells against tumors by regulating
NF-κB [126]. RASA2 ablation enhanced MAPK signaling and
prolonged survival and cytolytic activity of CAR-T cells in mice
xenografted with tumors [127]. Ye et al. identified proline
metabolism (PRODH2) as a means to enhance CAR-T therapy
through a genome-scale gain-of-function CRISPR screen in CD8 T
cells [128]. A genome-scale open reading frame screen identified
lymphotoxin-β receptor (LTBR) as a synthetic driver of T cell
proliferation [129]. These regulators have shown promising efficacy
in improving T cell fitness and anti-tumor efficacy and are generally
universal across different types of CARs because they are
fundamental genes in T cells [125,126,127,128,129]. Their
therapeutic values await clinical testing.
 In summary, engineering CAR-T cells with enhanced anti-tumor
functions through co-stimulatory domains, cytokine secretion, and
modulation of T cell regulators presents a promising avenue for
improving CAR-T therapy against solid tumors. Continued
preclinical investigations and future clinical trials will be crucial for
translating these approaches into effective clinical treatments.
 Improving the clinical safety of CAR-T cells
 Despite the clinical success of CAR-T therapy in hematological
malignancies and the perspective to become a turning point also in
solid tumors, this therapy still remains burdened by life-threatening
side effects, such as CRS and neurotoxicity [130]. CRS is a systemic
condition manifesting with constitutional symptoms, fever,
hypotension, and organ dysfunction in the most severe cases [131].
It is provoked by a mass release of cytokines, with a crucial
pathogenic role played by IL-1 and IL-6 [132], by CAR-T cells and
TME cells upon cancer cell recognition by CAR-T cells [133]. CAR-T

neurotoxicity, also known as immune effector cell-associated
neurotoxicity syndrome (ICANS), is a toxic encephalopathy
clinically closely linked to CRS in terms of pathogenesis [130]. The
prevalence of CRS in the registration trials resulted as extremely
high, inducing the conclusion that to a certain extent, all patients
treated with CAR-T develop a CRS, while around half of the patients
develop neurotoxicity [134]. It is worth mentioning that common
experimental designs used to study in vivo CAR technology fail to
adequately recapitulate this risk. This is demonstrated by the fact
that CRS was first described in the clinical setting, without any
anticipation by the preclinical studies [135,136,137]. While the
assessment of CRS in mice requires the collection of straightforward
parameters, including body temperature, weight, serum cytokines
[132], and serum amyloid A3 [138], the detection of ICANS needs a
more complex experimental evaluation, for which a consensus has
not yet been achieved. In a milestone paper in which the crucial
role of IL-1 and IL-6 in CRS and ICANS was highlighted, Norelli et
al. evaluated histopathological signs of meningeal inflammation and
defined lethal neurotoxicity as death preceded by motor deficit or
seizures, in the absence of CRS criteria [132]. A more clinically
detailed definition was provided by Faulhaber et al. who subjected
the mice to a daily neurophenotype scoring and an open-field test,
highlighting a correlation between ICANS and brain capillary
obstruction [139]. Furthermore, a recent paper by Vinnakota et al.,
using a fully murine CAR-T cell model, described the activation of
microglia after CAR-T injection. The described neuroinflammation
can be reduced by interfering with the TGFβ-activated kinase1-
NFκB-p38 MAPK pathway, ameliorating the neurocognitive deficits
[140].
 The current therapy for ICANS consists of a high-dose steroid course
[141], which at the same time reduces the clinical effectiveness of
CAR-T cells [142]. Therefore, an in-depth understanding of the
pathophysiology of this manifestation would be highly beneficial to
propose targeted therapy able to spare the CAR-T anti-cancer
activity.
 Another active study field is aimed at reducing the risk of off-target
toxic activity, which could prove crucial for application in solid
tumors. Among these, synNotch-regulated CAR enables T cells to

express the CAR only in the presence of a specific priming antigen,
increasing the specificity of the response while simultaneously
preserving CAR-T cells from the tonic signaling provided by a
constantly expressed CAR [143]. Similarly, by splitting the CD3ζ
and co-stimulatory domains into CARs with different specificities, T
cells can be engineered to be activated only in the concomitant
presence of the two targets [144]. At the same time, also inhibitory
CARs can prevent CAR-T cells from off-target activation [145]. The
combination of both split activatory signaling (AND) and inhibitory
CARs (NOT) allows for the integration of Boolean logic gates into
cancer immunotherapy, enhancing the precision of targeting cancer
cells.
 Worth mentioning is a synthetic biology solution that can mitigate
both on-target (CRS and ICANS) and off-target toxicity, consisting
of switchable CAR-T cells that can be modulated to transition from
inactive (OFF) to active (ON) state, or vice versa, through the
administration of regulator molecules. These constructs can be
grossly divided into two families, the OFF-switcher [146,147,148]
and the ON-switcher [149,150,151,152]. The latter offers the
additional advantage of protecting CAR-T cells from exhaustion
induced by tonic activation [151].
 CAR-NK cell therapy
 NK cells are innate lymphoid cells that play a critical role against
tumors and viral infection [153]. NK cells recognize stressed cells
[154] and exert a rapid and robust cytotoxic activity together with
the production of inflammatory cytokines [155]. The activation of
NK cells is regulated by a sophisticated integration of multiple
germline-encoded receptors that provide either “kill” or “do not
kill” signals [156]. The equilibrium between these opposing signals
dictates NK cell responsiveness and is finely tuned during an
education process aimed at achieving functional maturation and
self-tolerance [157]. NK cells detect MHC class I (MHC-I) molecules
through a variety of MHC-I-specific inhibitory receptors, including
inhibitory killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIRs). The
absence or low expression of MHC-I on the cell surface, which is
frequently observed in tumor cells, can trigger NK-induced killing,

known as “missing self” recognition [158]. Moreover, NK cells
recognize ligands that are upregulated on the cell surface of stressed
cells, known as “induced self” recognition. Besides “missing self”
and “induced self” responses, antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC) is another critical mechanism of NK-mediated
recognition and killing of cancer cells. NK cells can mediate IgG
opsonized cytotoxicity through CD16 (FCγRIII), which binds to the
Fc portion of IgG antibodies [159] and induces cytotoxicity [160].
 Upon activation, NK cells execute multiple functions to eliminate or
constrain the growth of cancer cells. Interestingly, for their first
killing events, NK cells eliminate target cells by forming lytic
immunological synapses and secrete pre-assembled cytolytic
granules containing granzyme B and perforin, leading to the
apoptosis of the target cells [161, 162]. Later, NK cells switch to the
use of death receptors, such as Fas ligand and TNF-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), to induce target cell death
[163]. Moreover, NK cells can produce several pro-inflammatory
cytokines, including IFN-γ and TNF-α, to limit the growth of target
cells and orchestrate the function of other innate and adaptive
immune cells [164].
 NK cells were proposed as cellular immunotherapy for cancer over
30 years ago due to their diverse mechanisms for recognizing and
eliminating cancer cells [165]. Furthermore, since NK cells do not
recognize targets presented by the HLA system, NK cells-based
immunotherapy can be used in an allogenic setting without the risk
of graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) [166] making possible the
development of a universal, “off-the-shelf” immunotherapy. These
promising characteristics have recently sparked significant interest
in CAR-NK cells, leading to exponential growth in technological
advances and preclinical results. Leveraging decades of experience
in T cell engineering, CAR-NK cells have undergone a significantly
accelerated development toward clinical applications [167].
 Challenges in CAR-NK cell therapy for solid tumor
 While the current clinical experience with CAR-NK cells mostly
comes from hematological malignancies (as summarized in
Table 1), insights into the biological characteristics of NK cells and

the preclinical findings can help predict potential pitfalls in their
application against solid tumors. Similar to CAR-T cells, the
application of CAR-NK cells in solid tumors faces challenges related
to trafficking toward the tumor. Despite playing a crucial role in
orchestrating the anti-tumor responses [168], NK cells are often
limited in their presence within several solid tumors [169],
indicating difficulties in their ability to reach, infiltrate, and persist
within TME. Additionally, infiltrating NK cells in solid tumors often
display a dysfunctional phenotype [170,171,172,173,174], partly
due to the detrimental factors such as hypoxia [175] and soluble
inhibitory factors [176,177,178] present in the TME. Finally, NK
cell-based immunotherapy must contend with the short half-life
[179] and short-term anti-cancer activity [180]. Although the
persistence of CAR-NK cells is a challenge shared with their
application in hematological malignancies, it becomes even more
crucial in the setting of solid tumors.
 Table 1 Representative clinical trials evaluating CAR-NK cell
therapy
 Full size table
 Strategies to improve CAR-NK cell therapy for solid
tumors (Fig. 3)
 Increasing NK trafficking and infiltration to solid tumors
 Clinical evidence suggests that the presence of activated NK cells
infiltrating solid tumors correlates with positive prognostic
outcomes [181,182,183], despite as aforementioned their low
ability to infiltrate and persist [169]. For this reason, in the first
clinical study evaluating CAR-NK cells in solid tumors, the cells
were locally administered in the colon cancer metastatic sites
[184]. The three patients treated showed signs of local response,
including a drastic reduction of cells in the ascites and a complete
metabolic response of the liver metastasis. However, since the
higher risk of adverse events and the logistic difficulties related to
locoregional delivery compared to intravenous injection, various
strategies have been tested to enhance NK cell migration.
 Fig. 3

[image]
 Current challenges and ongoing strategies to improve CAR-NK cell
therapy for solid tumors. CAR-NK cells face common obstacles with
CAR-T in effectively targeting solid tumors, including A cell
trafficking and B the immuno-suppressive effects of the tumor
microenvironment Potential strategies to overcome these shared
challenges are closely linked to understanding NK biology in the
context of solid tumors. NK cells are known for their short half-life
and time-limited anti-cancer activity (C), and overcoming these
biological characteristics may represent a turning point for the
application to solid tumors. Indeed, the reduced availability of
direct contact with cancer cells in solid tumors compared to
hematological ones makes the generation of long-surviving and
long-acting NK cells crucial. CAR-NK cells have benefited from the
translation of well-consolidated designs optimized for CAR-T. In
recent years, increased attention has been focused on different
strategies to optimize CAR specifically for NK cells
(D). Transmembrane (TM) and intracellular co-stimulatory domains
(ICDs). E Different sources have been explored to obtain NK cells
for clinical applications, including the immortalized NK-92 line,
peripheral blood (PB), cord blood (CB), hematopoietic stem cells
(HSC), and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC). Each of these
sources encompasses advantages and limitations. The challenge of
obtaining CAR-NK cells with the optimal balance between
pharmacoeconomic sustainability (cost and manufacturing
complexity) and reproducible efficacy (homogeneous and effective
product) is a critical step to fully harness their potential as an off-
the-shelf therapy. F Gene editing strategies aimed at boosting NK
cell anti-cancer activity have begun to be explored in both
hematological [249] and solid tumor models [250, 251]. Based on
the swift advances observed in this field for CAR-T cells, it is likely
that the biotechnological solutions to boost NK cell activity will
exponentially increase in the coming years
 Full size image
 Genetic engineering CAR-NK cells to express the chemokine
receptor CXCR4 has resulted in increased migration toward
CXCL12/SDF-1α and enhanced in vivo efficacy against CXCL12/

SDF-1α-secreting glioblastoma model U-87 [185]. Overexpression
of CXCR1 in CAR-NK cells has shown increased migration toward
the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-8 gradient, resulting in increased
infiltration in peritoneal ovarian cancer xenografts [186].
Furthermore, CXCR2-transduced NK cells have demonstrated
increased migration along CXCR2 ligands or renal cell carcinoma
tumor supernatants [185]. Similar results can be achieved by
inhibiting the G protein-coupled receptor CXCR3, involved in the
mobilization of NK cells from the bone marrow to the PB, thereby
increasing NK infiltration in a multiple myeloma model [187]. An
alternative strategy proposed by Lee et al. is the NK cell-recruiting
protein-conjugated antibody [188]. This molecule releases CXCL16
once cleaved by furin expressed on the surface of pancreatic cancer
cells, creating a gradient that enhances NK migration toward the
tumor in vivo.
 Overcoming TME immunosuppression
 Unlike dispersed hematologic malignancies, solid tumors, especially
late-stage ones, exhibit an inhibitory TME due to hypoxia, a low
pH, presence of suppressive cytokines, lactate, prostaglandins, and
others that negatively impact NK cell function [189]. TGF-β
dampens various aspects of NK cell anti-tumor function, including
cytokine secretion, degranulation, metabolism, and mTOR signaling
[190,191,192]. Therefore, pharmacological inhibition of TGF-β
[193] or engineering the TGF-β receptor on NK cells can potentially
overcome TGF-β-mediated inhibition and enhance NK anti-cancer
activity [194,195,196]. With this rationale, Prof. Weathers’s group
started a Phase I clinical trial evaluating the use of NK cells
genetically depleted for the TGF-β receptor 2 and the endogenous
glucocorticoid receptor NR3C1 (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier:
NCT04991870). If this trial shows positive results, this strategy can
also be implemented in CAR-NK to improve the detrimental effect
of TME.
 NK anti-tumor function is also affected by extracellular adenosine,
an element of hypoxia-driven purinergic signaling [197]. Adenosine
is generated in high concentrations in the TME from ATP and ADP
by the sequential activity of CD39/CD73 ectonucleotidases,
providing a broad immuno-suppressive effect on both T cells and

NK cells [198, 199]. Specifically, CD39-expressing Tregs are capable
of inhibiting the anti-tumor immunity of NK cells both in vivo and
in vitro [200]. Different strategies can be pursued to prevent the
detrimental role of adenosine on NK cells, including
ectonucleotidase or A2 receptor inhibitors [201]. Furthermore,
lymphocytes can be engineered to suppress the expression of
adenosine receptors [202,203,204].
 As described for CAR-T, CAR-NK can also benefit from the
concomitant use of checkpoint inhibitors. Both CTLA4 and PD-1 are
expressed by activated NK cells [205, 206] and NK anti-cancer
activity can be enhanced by disrupting these signaling pathways
[207, 208]. Furthermore, additional checkpoint inhibitors,
including NKG2A, TIGIT, and TIM3, have been shown to negatively
impact NK function [209, 210] and conversely, their inhibition may
improve NK anti-cancer activity [211,212,213].
 Increasing NK persistency
 One of the primary challenges in the clinical application of NK cells
for immunotherapy is their short half-life post-infusion, typically
limited to a few weeks [214, 215]. Currently, the most successful
strategy in the clinical setting involves NK cells encoding IL-15,
which have demonstrated in clinical settings, the persistence for
over 1 year after infusion [216]. These data were reported in the
dose-escalation phase of the trial evaluating CAR-NK cells in B-cell
tumors, enforced by the observation that responder patients display
a longer persistence of the injected cells [217].
 Once these data were integrated with the expansion phase (37
patients in total), the CD19/IL-15 CAR-NK demonstrated an overall
response rate of 48.6 and 68% of the patients survived for at least 1
year. This indicates an effectiveness comparable to the current CAR-
T cell therapies [27], but notably no major toxicity events such as
severe CRS, neurotoxicity, or GvHD were observed [217].
 Furthermore, the Rezvani group has also provided mechanistic
insights by integrating the post-infusion transcriptomic profile
obtained from the clinical trial with a preclinical model of non-
curative lymphoma [218]. Armoring CAR-NK with IL-15 appears to

ameliorate the loss of metabolic fitness observed after cell infusion,
enhancing in this way the tumor control in vivo.
 The inclusion of IL-15 into the CAR construct represents a
promising strategy also in other hematological malignancies [219],
and solid tumors, where these cells have shown a long persistence
in vivo in a preclinical model of pancreatic cancer [220].
 Another promising option for allogeneic cell therapy is harnessing
memory NK cells. This concept arises from evidence suggesting that
NK cells exhibit features of adaptive memory under specific
circumstances [221]. Like memory B and T cells, memory NK cells
possess the ability to mount an enhanced response upon rechallenge
to the same stimulus encountered previously and can be maintained
by a long-lived/self-maintaining population [222]. Cytokine-
induced memory-like (CIML) NK cells are generated through ex vivo
priming with IL-12, IL-15, and IL-18. These cells exhibit prolonged
persistence and demonstrate higher anti-cancer activity after a
resting period, encouraging investigation in clinical settings.
Indeed, CIML NK cells have shown encouraging results in clinical
settings [223,224,225] and represent a promising strategy as a
platform for CAR-NK technology [226].
 Optimizing CAR constructs for NK signaling (Fig. 4)
 Currently, most CAR-NK cell studies and clinical trials simply adapt
CAR constructs that were originally designed for CAR-T cells. While
these constructs can also function in NK cells, they are not
optimized for NK signaling. Given the variety of activating receptors
and adapter protein domains that contribute to NK fine-tuned
activation, NK CAR constructs could have more variations and
different combinations in the choice of extracellular, TM, and
intracellular signaling domains. This approach could lead to the
development of more effective and tailored CAR-NK cells for cancer
immunotherapy.
 Fig. 4
[image]
 Blueprint of CAR-NK construct design and optimization. Like CAR-

T, CAR-NK cells follow a modular design comprising an antigen-
binding domain, a hinge, a transmembrane domain, and an
intracellular signaling domain. Design and optimization strategies
can also be specific to each domain. In the hinge region, options
such as CD8, CD28, IgG1, and IgG4 have demonstrated some
efficacy in CAR-T cells and merit consideration. Additionally, for
the transmembrane domains, while CD3ζ, CD8α, CD4, CD28, and
ICOS are commonly employed in CAR-T cells, receptors specific to
NK activation, such as CD16, NKp44, NKp46, NKG2D, 2B4, and
DNAM-1, should be explored. When it comes to co-stimulation
domains, candidates like CD28, 4-1BB, OX40, ICOS, and MYD88-
CD40 warrant investigation. Furthermore, for the activation domain
of the intracellular signaling module, besides CD3ζ, NK-specific
activating receptors, DAP10, and DAP12, offer promising avenues
for experimentation
 Full size image
 Extracellular scFv domains
 Single and tumor-specific targets are challenging to find due to the
expression of most so-called TAAs on solid tumors are often
expressed at lower levels in healthy tissue. Moreover, targeting a
single antigen might lead to immune escape, as often observed in
CAR-T therapy. Notably, NK-activating receptors naturally have less
specificity and can target multiple cancer antigens. NKG2D, for
example, can recognize up to eight stress-induced molecules,
including MICA/B and RAET1/ULBP family, on the surface of
distressed cells [227]. Therefore, certain CAR constructs exploit the
natural tumor recognition of NK receptors. NKG2D-based CAR-NK
cells have been shown to be effective against multiple myeloma
cells in a preclinical setting [228] and in a clinical study with
metastatic colorectal cancer patients [184]. Similarly, NCR1-derived
CAR or NCR2-derived CAR constructs are tested to improve cancer
immunotherapy [229, 230]. These approaches leverage the broader
tumor recognition capabilities of NK cells to potentially overcome
the limitations associated with targeting single antigens, benefiting
both CAR-T and CAR-NK cell therapy.
 Transmembrane domains and hinge

The TM domain serves to connect the extracellular domain of the
CAR to the intracellular activation signaling domains and dock the
CAR construct to the cell membrane. Therefore, they are important
for signal transduction CAR dimerization and signal transduction. In
CAR-NK cells, the most commonly used TM domains are adapted
from CAR-T cell constructs, such as CD3ζ, CD8, and CD28.
However, the TM domains of several NK-activating receptors, such
as CD16, NKp44, NKp46, NKG2D, 2B4, and DNAM-1, possess
charged amino acids capable of directly interacting with signaling
adapters and follow the natural orientation (N to C terminal, except
for NKG2D). Consequently, these TM domains are actively explored
in the NK CAR screen studies [231]. Interestingly, CAR constructs
containing TM domains from NK-activating receptors, such as
DNAM-1, 2B4, and NKG2D, typically yield higher cytotoxicity.
 Intracellular co-stimulatory domains
 Once the signals from activating receptors surpass those provided
by inhibitory receptors [232], NK cells are activated through
signaling adapter proteins. These proteins, in addition to CD3ζ,
include DAP10, DAP12, and FcRγ [233]. The incorporation of these
activated signaling adapters, either individually or in combination,
to optimize CAR design for NK cells has begun to be explored in
recent years [234]. Li et al. identified a tailored NK CAR construct
containing the NKG2D TM domain, the 2B4 co-stimulatory domain,
and the CD3ζ signaling domain, which mediated stronger antigen-
specific cytotoxicity than T CAR and other constructs [231].
Moreover, CAR constructs including other NK-specific signaling
domains, such as DAP10 and DAP12, could also increase NK anti-
tumor efficacy [231]. These findings underscore the importance of
optimizing CAR constructs specifically for NK cells to enhance their
therapeutic potential. However, there is a lack of systematic
research on NK CAR constructs, and the full potential of NK CAR-
mediated signaling has yet to be fully explored.
 Novel expansion methods and sources of NK cells
 To date, various sources have been explored to obtain NK cells for
clinical applications, including the immortalized cell line NK-92,
umbilical cord blood (CB), CB-derived CD34+ hematopoietic stem

and progenitor cells, and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs).
Each of them presents advantages and disadvantages in terms of the
linked manufacturing processes, including source collection, NK
isolation/differentiation, genetic modification, and expansion into
large amounts.
 Immortalized NK cell lines
 NK-92 cells, derived from a patient with non-HL, offer the potential
for unlimited ex vivo expansion with minimal manufacturing effort
[235]. Moreover, due to their homogeneous nature and lower
resistance to transduction, NK-92 cells serve as an ideal prototype
for developing CAR-based immunotherapies [236]. Consequently,
NK-92 cells were the first NK cell line to gain authorization from
the FDA for clinical trials and the platform for the first-in-man trial
involving CAR-NK [236]. An interim report of this Phase I clinical
trial evaluating CD33-CAR NK-92 cells in three patients with
relapsed or refractory acute myeloid leukemia reported no
significant adverse event but also no durable disease control [236].
 Indeed, due to their immortalized nature, NK-92 cells require
irradiation before clinical use, resulting in a subsequent reduction
in persistence and clinical efficacy [237]. Furthermore, NK-92 cells
lack ADCC due to the absence of CD16 expression [238]. Therefore,
the development of genetically engineered NK-92-derived products
is essential for enhancing their in vivo anti-tumor function.
 Peripheral blood (PB)-derived NK cells
 Primary NK cells can be isolated and expanded from PB, where they
commonly represent 5–15% of the lymphocytes [239]. To obtain
the required amount of cells for clinical applications, this protocol
requires the apheresis of a healthy donor and has been the main
source of non-genetically modified NK cells in recent years,
obtained through both negative selection after CD3/CD19 depletion
or positive selection [240].
 Umbilical cord blood (CB)-derived NK cells
 Unlike PB, CB lymphocytes contain up to 30% NK cells and a higher

percentage of CD56bright subset, making CB a rich source of
therapeutic effector NK cells [241]. Furthermore, CB is abundant in
HPCs, making it an ideal substrate for the in vitro differentiation of
therapeutic NK cells with desired phenotypes [242]. However, CB-
tderived NK cells show weaker cytotoxic activity against K562
leukemia cells and produce less IFN-γ compared to PB-derived NK
cells, possibly due to their higher expression of inhibitory receptors
such as NKG2A [241, 242]. Further exploration is needed to
understand the regulators guiding CB HPC differentiation into
effector NK cells with enhanced in vivo anti-tumor efficacy. The
therapeutic potential of CB-derived NK cells requires systematic
evaluation in more clinical trials.
 Hematopoietic stem cells (HSC)-derived NK cells
 To date, most adoptive NK cell therapies have utilized PB NK cells,
CB NK cells, or NK-92 cells. However, each of these cell sources
presents significant limitations, as discussed earlier. Due to the
issues of clinical efficacy and donor heterogeneity, considerable
attention is now directed toward stem cell-derived NK cells, offering
standardized “off-the-shelf” therapies for patients regardless of their
HLA haplotype. NK cells expanded and differentiated from CD34+
 HSC offer the potential for unlimited quantities and are more
amenable to genetic manipulation [243]. Although this method
inherits many logistical advantages from using CB as a source for
NK expansion, it requires more than 40 days of expansion time due
to the relatively low absolute number of CD34+ cells retrieved from
CB [155]. Overall, these sources have undergone testing in Phase I
clinical trials for acute myeloid leukemia, showing promising results
[243].
 Induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived NK cells
 The iPSC-based methodology involves reprogramming adult somatic
cells into pluripotent cells, followed by differentiation into NK cells
and subsequent expansion to generate the final products [244].
iPSCs can be derived from easily accessible cells such as fibroblasts
and blood cells, offering the potential to generate a large number of
homogeneous NK cells from a single clone. This approach addresses
the variability associated with editing a bulk NK cell population,

making iPSCs-derived NK particularly suitable for gene-edited
products [245,246,247]. Additionally, iPSC-derived NK cells have
been shown to exhibit more potent cytotoxicity than PB NK cells
[231]. Currently, iPSC-derived NK cells with multiple genes
modified are being actively evaluated in clinical trials [248].
 Alternative strategies for enhancing CAR-NK cell function
 To date, only a small number of genes have been identified where
knockout or perturbation has a strong effect on NK cell’s anti-tumor
efficacy. For example, the deletion of Cytokine-inducible SH2-
containing protein (CISH) in iPSC or CB-derived NK cells enhances in
vivo persistence and anti-tumor response [218, 249]. It has also
been shown that overexpressing DNAM-1 and/or NKG2D in NK cells
enhances effectiveness against patient-derived sarcoma specimens
in vitro [250]. The complex interaction among various mechanisms
can interfere with NK activity in the setting of solid tumors, posing
challenges for reductionist approaches to exploring these issues. On
the other hand, this complex scenario is particularly suitable for
unbiased functional genetic screens using in vivo models that can
recapitulate the interrogated phenotype. We have recently
conducted a study in which an in vivo CRISPR screen and
orthogonal single-cell profiling of infiltrating NK cells across
different tumor models have convergently identified the novel NK
suppressor Calcium homeostasis modulator family member 2
(CALHM2). Knockdown of this calcium channel resulted in
improving CAR-NK anti-cancer efficacy both in murine and human
NK cells [251]. Finally, CAR-NK cells have been shown to acquire
the target antigen on their surface through a trygocytosis process
[252]. This event not only reduces the presence of the tumor
antigen in the target cells but also induces a fratricide depletion of
the therapeutic cells. To prevent this process and enhance cell
activity, CAR-NK cells can be engineered to express a second
inhibitory KIR-based CAR, able to recognize a “do not kill me”
signal like the NK-expressed CS1 antigen [253]. This strategy has
been demonstrated to improve in vivo the CAR-NK cell anti-cancer
activity against B-cell lymphoma [252].

CAR-T vs CAR-NK cells
 Advantages of CAR-NK cells over CAR-T cells (Fig. 5)
 One of the major limitations of the broader applicability of CAR-T
therapy is linked to the necessity to use donor-derived cells to avoid
both GvHD and the rejection of the infused cells, known as host-
versus-graft (HvG) reaction. Since patients are usually heavily
treated before CAR-T therapy, harvesting sufficient healthy
autologous T cells from patients can significantly delay treatment
and pose challenges for CAR-T manufacturing. The lengthy and
cumbersome process of CAR-T manufacturing makes many patients
either ineligible for the treatment or experience disease progression
after being enrolled in the treatment process [254]. It must be
mentioned that for hematological tumors previously treated with
allogeneic hematopoietic transplantation, CAR-T cells derived from
the same donor can be used without evidence of GvHD [255].
However, the necessity to produce a patient-specific product deeply
impacts the possibility of scaling up the manufacturing process to
reduce the cost, which is estimated in the USA between $370,000
and $530,000 per single treatment [256]. Therefore, the possibility
of using an “off-the-shelf” allogeneic product currently represents a
priority in this field.
 Fig. 5
[image]
 Advantages and limitations of CAR-T and CAR-NK cells. Both CAR-T
and CAR-NK cells exhibit distinct advantages and limitations. CAR-
T cells offer long-term tumor control capabilities but are associated
with risks such as cytokine release syndrome, neurotoxicity, GvHD
effects, and donor heterogeneity. On the other hand, CAR-NK cells
present several advantages, including a lower risk of GvHD, “off-
the-shelf” manufacturing feasibility, reduced incidence of cytokine
release syndrome and neurotoxicity, as well as antigen-independent
killing abilities. However, they do have drawbacks such as a shorter
lifespan and potentially limited tumor infiltration capabilities
 Full size image

Different strategies can be pursued to reduce and limit the risk of
CAR-T cells-induced GvHD. This adverse event mainly depends on
the expression of functional αβTCR, therefore CAR-T cells can be
genetically modified to not express the TCRα chain
[257,258,259,260] and used as an allogeneic product. Since CAR-
NK cells act in an HLA-unrestricted manner, these cells have the
advantage of not inducing GvHD in an allogenic setting and
therefore do not require any additional gene editing to be used as
an “off-the-shelf” therapy. Existing NK-92 cell lines or primary NK
cells sourced from allogeneic donors can be utilized and
manufactured through mass production, as demonstrated by
Rezvani’s group which has proposed a protocol able to obtain more
than a hundred CAR-NK cell doses from one CB unit [261].
 On the contrary, both allogenic TCRα chain− CAR-T and CAR-NK
cells remain vulnerable to HvG reaction when administered in
immunocompetent patients. In hematological malignancies, the
possibility of disrupting the recipient’s immune system as part of
the therapeutic process has allowed different options to avoid
rejection. Among these, knocking out the common lymphocyte
antigen CD52 [262] on CAR cells and administering them together
with the lymphodepleting anti-CD56 antibody alemtuzumab is a
viable strategy [263]. However, in conditions like solid tumors, the
necessity to preserve also the host immune system implies pursuing
different approaches. Gene editing approaches aimed to make
invisible these cells to the immune system must contend with the
robustness of immunosurveillance. Indeed, while the knockout of
β2-microglobulin can counteract the HLA-dependent recognition of
recipient T cells [262], it provides a “missing self” activating signal
to the NK cells. This issue could be avoided by overexpressing the
non-classical HLA-E or G [262, 264] but this requires an additional
gene editing step.
 Safety profile with reduced CRS and neurotoxicity
 CAR-T cell activation often leads to the release of inflammatory
cytokines, resulting in CRS and neurotoxicity [254, 265]. However,
CAR-NK cells release different profiles of cytokines. Indeed, as
consistently demonstrated by a long series of clinical trials with
parental NK cells, patients who received allogenic CAR-NK cell

therapy did not develop CRS or neurotoxicity and did not exhibit
increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1β, IL-6,
and IL-10 [214, 266,267,268]. Despite the current extremely
limited clinical experience with CAR-NK compared to CAR-T cells
[184, 217, 236], these clinical data so far confirm what has been
observed for parental NK cells and have shown that, in contrast to
CAR-T, CAR-NK cells have been rarely associated with CRS and not
associated with neurotoxicity [217, 269]. This suggests that CAR-
NK cells may offer a safer alternative to CAR-T cells about these
serious adverse events.
 Multiple tumor recognition mechanisms
 Since CAR-NK cells can recognize and eliminate cancer cells in both
antigen-dependent and antigen-independent manners [270] this
therapy may present significant advantages in the application for
solid tumors compared to CAR-T. As previously mentioned,
different strategies are currently under evaluation to allow CAR-T to
overcome the heterogeneity and antigen escape of solid tumors. In
contrast, NK cells naturally possess antigen-independent
mechanisms that may prove beneficial for tumors with fine
subclonal heterogeneity [271]. Additionally, NK cells can mediate
ADCC through CD16, which binds to the Fc domain of IgG bound
on cancer cells. This further enhances their potential effectiveness
against solid tumors.
 Limitations of CAR-NK cells
 Despite CAR-NK’s promising features, several significant limitations
exist that hinder its successful application in treating solid tumors.
Many of these limitations parallel those associated with CAR-T
therapy, such as poor tumor infiltration [272, 273] and detrimental
interactions with the TME [189]. Moreover, NK cells have specific
limitations unique to their biology and function.
 Resistance to viral transduction
 One of the main limitations of CAR-NK cell application consists of
the resistance of NK cells to viral transduction [274] compared to T

cells [275]. In a recent clinical trial using a retrovirus vector to
generate CAR-NK cells a median transduction efficiency of 72.4%
was observed [217]. However, the wide range of variability in these
data (from 22.7% to 91.1%) represents a significant limitation that
could affect the statistical power of a controlled Phase II or Phase III
clinical trial. This result was obtained by stimulating NK cells with
IL-2 and feeder cells the day before the transduction, taking
advantage of the retrovirus’s preference for infecting actively
replicating cells [276]. Among the six CAR-T cell products currently
approved by FDA, four adopt a lentivirus vector (Carvykti™,
Kymriah™, Breyanzi®, and Abecma®), and two a γ-retroviruses one
(Yescarta™ and Tecartus™). Despite there are currently no clinical
data indicating that one strategy is superior or safer than the other,
at least for the current generation of viral vectors, it must be noted
that γ-retroviruses preferentially insert near enhancers and
promoters, implying a higher risk of insertional mutagenesis
compared to lentivirus vectors [277]. This phenomenon
dramatically emerged in clinical settings when children affected by
X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency treated with γ-
retrovirus-edited HSCs developed leukemia [278,279,280]. For this
reason, different strategies have been explored to optimize also a
lentivirus-based transduction protocol for NK cells. These strategies
must address the antiviral response that lentivirus triggers in NK
cells, which induces their apoptosis [281]. Among them, worthy of
mention is the exposure to cytokine combinations like IL-2, IL-12,
and IL-21 [281,282,283] or the pretreatment with the TBK1-
inhibitor BX759, able to interfere with the signal downstream the
pattern recognition receptors [281, 284]. The results from these
studies have demonstrated the possibility of increasing lentivirus
transduction efficiency in human primary NK cells to 25–40% [281,
284], therefore further research and innovative solutions are
needed to optimize this process in NK cells.
 Short lifespan and poor persistence
 NK cells have a short half-life [285] and exhibit poor persistence
once transferred from ex vivo conditions with supraphysiological
cytokine exposure to in vivo conditions [286]. This aspect could
potentially imply the necessity for multiple infusions. For CAR-T
cells, a second infusion is not associated with major toxicity risks

[287], but this strategy has only started to be explored for CAR-NK
cells. Current evidence seems to indicate that multiple
administrations of CAR-NK are not associated with serious adverse
events. However, these data come from the interim reports of three
Phase I clinical trials, performed in solid tumors [184] and
hematological malignancies [236, 288], that together enrolled a
total of 19 patients. Furthermore, it must be mentioned that in the
first study, the cell product only transiently expressed the CAR, as it
was obtained by electroporating NK cells with NKG2D CAR mRNA
and was locally injected into the metastatic sites. Therefore, further
studies are needed for the safety evaluation of this strategy.
Furthermore, this approach would potentially impact the cost-
effectiveness of the CAR therapy, therefore there is an active
exploration into reprogramming CAR-NK cells to possess memory or
memory-like properties, aiming for long-term tumor control. This
avenue of research holds promise for addressing the limitations
associated with NK cell persistence in CAR-NK cell therapy.
 Future perspectives
 FDA has recently issued a warning on approved CAR-T cell products
due to the observation of T cell malignancies in a small number of
CAR-T-treated patients. Despite the overall low rate of such events
(22 cases reported among over 27,000 treated patients reported to
date), the recurrent reports across 5 of the 6 approved CAR-T cell
therapy products have led the FDA to add a class-wide boxed
warning to these therapies [289]. In three of these cases, cancer
cells have been demonstrated to contain the CAR [290], indicating
a malignant transformation of the infused therapy as the pivotal
cause. This malignant transformation appears to be a rare event,
however, since the current perspective of a broad expansion of
clinical indication do CAR therapy, encompassing cancers in earlier
therapeutic stages and other conditions, including autoimmune
diseases [291], and HIV [292], the assessment of rare adverse
events will become even more pertinent. At the moment we are
writing this review, the mechanistic events leading to the cancerous
transformation of CAR-T cells are under investigation, and no firm
conclusions have been drawn on the direct involvement of the virus
vector in this process [290]. However, the FDA warning represents

an opportunity to review all the critical steps of CAR
manufacturing, including vector safety, and evaluate potential
solutions.
 A proposed strategy to address these safety concerns includes the
incorporation of a suicide gene, like caspase 9 [64] or the herpes
simplex virus tyrosine kinase [293] to induce apoptosis in the event
of toxicity or malignant transformation. Furthermore, alternative
delivery systems are under investigation in clinical trials, including
CRISPR/Cas9 and transposon/transposase-based approaches
[294,295,296,297]. Both strategies present advantages and
disadvantages, for which an in-depth discussion can be found in a
dedicated review [298], however, it is evident that these
technologies are living in an exponential development phase that
will likely surpass the retro/lentivirus-based approaches in terms of
safety, quality of the product (e.g., efficiency of transgene delivery),
logistic feasibility and costs. For example, in our laboratory, we
have developed a transposon/transposase-based system, named
MAJESTIC (mRNA Adeno-associated virus-Sleeping Beauty Joint
Engineering of Atable Therapeutic Immune Cells). By making as
transient the Sleeping Beauty transposase component, this system
avoids repeated transposon mobilization, further reducing the risk
of insertional mutagenesis [299].
 The contribution of innovative biotechnological tools to the
improvement of CAR immunotherapies has only begun to show its
potential. For example, many of the solutions to overcome the
limitations of CAR-T and NK cells summarized in this review have
been achieved through the application of high-throughput CRISPR
technology [123, 124, 126, 128, 129, 251]. Furthermore, data
derived from ongoing clinical trials will allow for a deeper
understanding of the limitations of CAR therapies, enabling the
design of more precise readouts for functional genetic screens. This
dynamic and virtuous exchange between biotechnology
development and data from clinical trials represents the keystone
for evolving CAR-T and CAR-NK therapies toward the next
generations of cancer treatment, ultimately leading to improved
patient outcomes.

References
 1. Riley RS, June CH, Langer R, Mitchell MJ. Delivery
technologies for cancer immunotherapy. Nat Rev Drug
Discov. 2019;18:175–96.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 2. Zhang Y, Zhang Z. The history and advances in cancer
immunotherapy: understanding the characteristics of tumor-
infiltrating immune cells and their therapeutic implications.
Cell Mol Immunol. 2020;17:807–21.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 3. Ma R, Li Z, Chiocca EA, Caligiuri MA, Yu J. The emerging
field of oncolytic virus-based cancer immunotherapy. Trends
Cancer. 2023;9:122–39.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 4. Maalej KM, Merhi M, Inchakalody VP, Mestiri S, Alam M,
Maccalli C, et al. CAR-cell therapy in the era of solid tumor
treatment: current challenges and emerging therapeutic
advances. Mol Cancer. 2023;22:20.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 5. Naimi A, Mohammed RN, Raji A, Chupradit S, Yumashev AV,
Suksatan W, et al. Tumor immunotherapies by immune
checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs); the pros and cons. Cell Commun
Signal. 2022;20:44.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 6. Yoo MJ, Long B, Brady WJ, Holian A, Sudhir A, Gottlieb M.
Immune checkpoint inhibitors: an emergency medicine
focused review. Am J Emerg Med. 2021;50:335–44.
 Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 

7. Fan A, Wang B, Wang X, Nie Y, Fan D, Zhao X, et al.
Immunotherapy in colorectal cancer: current achievements
and future perspective. Int J Biol Sci. 2021;17:3837–49.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 8. O’Donnell JS, Teng MWL, Smyth MJ. Cancer immunoediting
and resistance to T cell-based immunotherapy. Nat Rev Clin
Oncol. 2019;16:151–67.
 Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 9. Larson RC, Maus MV. Recent advances and discoveries in the
mechanisms and functions of CAR T cells. Nat Rev Cancer.
2021;21:145–61.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 10. Shiravand Y, Khodadadi F, Kashani S, Hosseini-Fard SR,
Hosseini S, Sadeghirad H, et al. Immune checkpoint inhibitors
in cancer therapy. Curr Oncol. 2022;29:3044–60.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 11. Boukouris AE, Theochari M, Stefanou D, Papalambros A,
Felekouras E, Gogas H, et al. Latest evidence on immune
checkpoint inhibitors in metastatic colorectal cancer: a 2022
update. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2022;173:103663.
 Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 12. Fuchs N, Zhang L, Calvo-Barreiro L, Kuncewicz K, Gabr M.
Inhibitors of immune checkpoints: small molecule- and
peptide-based approaches. J Pers Med. 2024;14:68.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 13. Finck AV, Blanchard T, Roselle CP, Golinelli G, June CH.
Engineered cellular immunotherapies in cancer and beyond.
Nat Med. 2022;28:678–89.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 

14. Sun Q, Zhao X, Li S, Yang F, Wang H, Cui F, et al. CSF
neurofilament light chain elevation predicts ALS severity and
progression. Front Neurol. 2020;11:919.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 15. Schreiber RD, Old LJ, Smyth MJ. Cancer immunoediting:
integrating immunity’s roles in cancer suppression and
promotion. Science. 2011;331:1565–70.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 16. Oliveira G, Wu CJ. Dynamics and specificities of T cells in
cancer immunotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2023;23:295–316.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 17. Chow A, Perica K, Klebanoff CA, Wolchok JD. Clinical
implications of T cell exhaustion for cancer immunotherapy.
Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2022;19:775–90.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 18. Wherry EJ, Kurachi M. Molecular and cellular insights into T
cell exhaustion. Nat Rev Immunol. 2015;15:486–99.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 19. Wachsmann T, Wouters AK, Remst D, Hagedoorn RS,
Meeuwsen MH, van Diest E, et al. Comparing CAR and TCR
engineered T cell performance as a function of tumor cell
exposure. OncoImmunology. 2022;11:2033528.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 20. Galon J, Bruni D. Approaches to treat immune hot, altered
and cold tumours with combination immunotherapies. Nat
Rev Drug Discov. 2019;18:197–218.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 21. Hiltensperger M, Krackhardt AM. Current and future concepts

for the generation and application of genetically engineered
CAR-T and TCR-T cells. Front Immunol. 2023;14:1121030.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 22. Liu Y, Liu G, Wang J, Zheng Z, Jia L, Rui W, et al. Chimeric
STAR receptors using TCR machinery mediate robust
responses against solid tumors. Sci Transl Med.
2021;13:eabb5191.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 23. Mansilla-Soto J, Eyquem J, Haubner S, Hamieh M, Feucht J,
Paillon N, et al. HLA-independent T cell receptors for
targeting tumors with low antigen density. Nat Med.
2022;28:345–52.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 24. Labanieh L, Majzner RG, Mackall CL. Programming CAR-T
cells to kill cancer. Nat Biomed Eng. 2018;2:377–91.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 25. Miliotou AN, Papadopoulou LC. CAR T-cell therapy: a new
era in cancer immunotherapy. Curr Pharm Biotechnol.
2018;19:5–18.
 Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 26. Barros L, Couto S, da Silva Santurio D, Paixão EA, Cardoso F,
da Silva VJ, et al. Systematic review of available CAR-T cell
trials around the world. Cancers. 2022;14:2667.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 27. Cappell KM, Kochenderfer JN. Long-term outcomes following
CAR T cell therapy: what we know so far. Nat Rev Clin Oncol.
2023;20:359–71.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 

28. Labanieh L, Mackall CL. CAR immune cells: design principles,
resistance and the next generation. Nature. 2023;614:635–48.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 29. Drougkas K, Karampinos K, Karavolias I, Koumprentziotis IA,
Ploumaki I, Triantafyllou E, et al. Comprehensive clinical
evaluation of CAR-T cell immunotherapy for solid tumors: a
path moving forward or a dead end? J Cancer Res Clin Oncol.
2023;149:2709–34.
 Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 30. Brown CE, Badie B, Barish ME, Weng L, Ostberg JR, Chang
WC, et al. Bioactivity and safety of IL13Rα2-redirected
chimeric antigen receptor CD8+ T cells in patients with
recurrent glioblastoma. Clin Cancer Res J Am Assoc Cancer
Res. 2015;21:4062–72.
 Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
 31. Brown CE, Rodriguez A, Palmer J, Ostberg JR, Naranjo A,
Wagner JR, et al. Off-the-shelf, steroid-resistant, IL13Rα2-
specific CAR T cells for treatment of glioblastoma. Neuro-
oncology. 2022;24:1318–30.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 32. Brown CE, Alizadeh D, Starr R, Weng L, Wagner JR, Naranjo
A, et al. Regression of glioblastoma after chimeric antigen
receptor T-cell therapy. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:2561–9.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 33. Brown CE, Hibbard JC, Alizadeh D, Blanchard MS, Natri HM,
Wang D, et al. Locoregional delivery of IL-13Rα2-targeting
CAR-T cells in recurrent high-grade glioma: a phase 1 trial.
Nat Med. 2024;30:1001–12.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 34. Vitanza NA, Johnson AJ, Wilson AL, Brown C, Yokoyama JK,

Künkele A, et al. Locoregional infusion of HER2-specific CAR
T cells in children and young adults with recurrent or
refractory CNS tumors: an interim analysis. Nat Med.
2021;27:1544–52.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 35. Vitanza NA, Wilson AL, Huang W, Seidel K, Brown C,
Gustafson JA, et al. Intraventricular B7-H3 CAR T cells for
diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma: preliminary first-in-human
bioactivity and safety. Cancer Discov. 2023;13:114–31.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 36. Ahmed N, Brawley V, Hegde M, Bielamowicz K, Kalra M,
Landi D, et al. HER2-specific chimeric antigen receptor-
modified virus-specific T cells for progressive glioblastoma: a
phase 1 dose-escalation trial. JAMA Oncol. 2017;3:1094–101.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 37. Goff SL, Morgan RA, Yang JC, Sherry RM, Robbins PF, Restifo
NP, et al. Pilot trial of adoptive transfer of chimeric antigen
receptor-transduced T cells targeting EGFRvIII in patients
with glioblastoma. J Immunother. 2019;42:126–35.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 38. O’Rourke DM, Nasrallah MP, Desai A, Melenhorst JJ,
Mansfield K, Morrissette JJD, et al. A single dose of
peripherally infused EGFRvIII-directed CAR T cells mediates
antigen loss and induces adaptive resistance in patients with
recurrent glioblastoma. Sci Transl Med. 2017;9:eaaa0984.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 39. Majzner RG, Ramakrishna S, Yeom KW, Patel S, Chinnasamy
H, Schultz LM, et al. GD2-CAR T cell therapy for H3K27M-
mutated diffuse midline gliomas. Nature. 2022;603:934–41.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 

40. Choi BD, Gerstner ER, Frigault MJ, Leick MB, Mount CW,
Balaj L, et al. Intraventricular CARv3-TEAM-E T cells in
recurrent glioblastoma. N Engl J Med. 2024;390:1290–8.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 41. Chen E, Ling AL, Reardon DA, Chiocca EA. Lessons learned
from phase 3 trials of immunotherapy for glioblastoma: time
for longitudinal sampling? Neuro-oncology. 2024;26:211–25.
 Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 42. Ma S, Li X, Wang X, Cheng L, Li Z, Zhang C, et al. Current
progress in CAR-T cell therapy for solid tumors. Int J Biol Sci.
2019;15:2548–60.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 43. Sterner RC, Sterner RM. CAR-T cell therapy: current
limitations and potential strategies. Blood Cancer J.
2021;11:69.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 44. Jogalekar MP, Rajendran RL, Khan F, Dmello C, Gangadaran
P, Ahn BC. CAR T-cell-based gene therapy for cancers: new
perspectives, challenges, and clinical developments. Front
Immunol. 2022;13:925985.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 45. Li J, Li W, Huang K, Zhang Y, Kupfer G, Zhao Q. Chimeric
antigen receptor T cell (CAR-T) immunotherapy for solid
tumors: lessons learned and strategies for moving forward. J
Hematol Oncol. 2018;11:22.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 46. Rafiq S, Hackett CS, Brentjens RJ. Engineering strategies to
overcome the current roadblocks in CAR T cell therapy. Nat
Rev Clin Oncol. 2020;17:147–67.

Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 47. Daei Sorkhabi A, Mohamed Khosroshahi L, Sarkesh A, Mardi
A, Aghebati-Maleki A, Aghebati-Maleki L, et al. The current
landscape of CAR T-cell therapy for solid tumors:
mechanisms, research progress, challenges, and
counterstrategies. Front Immunol. 2023;14:1113882.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 48. Hong M, Talluri S, Chen YY. Advances in promoting chimeric
antigen receptor T cell trafficking and infiltration of solid
tumors. Curr Opin Biotechnol. 2023;84:103020.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 49. Hawkins ER, D’Souza RR, Klampatsa A. Armored CAR T-cells:
the next chapter in T-cell cancer immunotherapy. Biol Targets
Ther. 2021;15:95–105.
 Article  Google Scholar 
 50. Han D, Xu Z, Zhuang Y, Ye Z, Qian Q. Current progress in
CAR-T cell therapy for hematological malignancies. J Cancer.
2021;12:326–34.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 51. Sang W, Shi M, Yang J, Cao J, Xu L, Yan D, et al. Phase II
trial of co‐administration of CD19‐ and CD20‐targeted
chimeric antigen receptor T cells for relapsed and refractory
diffuse large B cell lymphoma. Cancer Med. 2020;9:5827–38.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 52. Muhammad N, Wang R, Li W, Zhang Z, Chang Y, Hu Y, et al.
A novel TanCAR targeting IL13Rα2 and EphA2 for enhanced
glioblastoma therapy. Mol Ther Oncolytics. 2022;24:729–41.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 53. Wing A, Fajardo CA, Posey AD Jr, Shaw C, Da T, Young RM,

et al. Improving CART-cell therapy of solid tumors with
oncolytic virus–driven production of a bispecific T-cell
engager. Cancer Immunol Res. 2018;6:605–16.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 54. Weller M, Butowski N, Tran DD, Recht LD, Lim M, Hirte H, et
al. Rindopepimut with temozolomide for patients with newly
diagnosed, EGFRvIII-expressing glioblastoma (ACT IV): a
randomised, double-blind, international phase 3 trial. Lancet
Oncol. 2017;18:1373–85.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 55. Lohmueller JJ, Ham JD, Kvorjak M, Finn OJ. mSA2 affinity-
enhanced biotin-binding CAR T cells for universal tumor
targeting. Oncoimmunology. 2018;7:e1368604.
 Article  Google Scholar 
 56. Cho JH, Collins JJ, Wong WW. Universal chimeric antigen
receptors for multiplexed and logical control of T cell
responses. Cell. 2018;173:1426–38.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 57. Reinhard K, Rengstl B, Oehm P, Michel K, Billmeier A,
Hayduk N, et al. An RNA vaccine drives expansion and
efficacy of claudin-CAR-T cells against solid tumors. Science.
2020;367:446–53.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 58. Ma L, Hostetler A, Morgan DM, Maiorino L, Sulkaj I,
Whittaker CA, et al. Vaccine-boosted CAR T crosstalk with
host immunity to reject tumors with antigen heterogeneity.
Cell. 2023;186:3148–65.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 59. Mackensen A, Haanen J, Koenecke C, Alsdorf W, Wagner-
Drouet E, Borchmann P, et al. CLDN6-specific CAR-T cells

plus amplifying RNA vaccine in relapsed or refractory solid
tumors: the phase 1 BNT211-01 trial. Nat Med.
2023;29:2844–53.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 60. Märkl F, Huynh D, Endres S, Kobold S. Utilizing chemokines
in cancer immunotherapy. Trends Cancer. 2022;8:670–82.
 Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 61. Neurath MF. Targeting immune cell circuits and trafficking in
inflammatory bowel disease. Nat Immunol. 2019;20:970–9.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 62. Jin L, Tao H, Karachi A, Long Y, Hou AY, Na M, et al. CXCR1-
or CXCR2-modified CAR T cells co-opt IL-8 for maximal
antitumor efficacy in solid tumors. Nat Commun.
2019;10:4016.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 63. Yoshie O, Matsushima K. CCR4 and its ligands: from bench to
bedside. Int Immunol. 2015;27:11–20.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 64. Di Stasi A, De Angelis B, Rooney CM, Zhang L, Mahendravada
A, Foster AE, et al. T lymphocytes coexpressing CCR4 and a
chimeric antigen receptor targeting CD30 have improved
homing and antitumor activity in a Hodgkin tumor model.
Blood. 2009;113:6392–402.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 65. Grover NS, Ivanova A, Moore DT, Cheng CJA, Babinec C,
West J, et al. CD30-directed CAR-T cells co-expressing CCR4
in relapsed/refractory hodgkin lymphoma and CD30+
cutaneous T cell lymphoma. Blood. 2021;138:742–742.
 Article  Google Scholar 

66. Craddock JA, Lu A, Bear A, Pule M, Brenner MK, Rooney CM,
et al. Enhanced tumor trafficking of GD2 chimeric antigen
receptor T cells by expression of the chemokine receptor
CCR2b. J Immunother. 2010;33:780–8.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 67. Moon EK, Carpenito C, Sun J, Wang LC, Kapoor V, Predina J,
et al. Expression of a functional CCR2 receptor enhances
tumor localization and tumor eradication by retargeted
human T cells expressing a mesothelin-specific chimeric
antibody receptor. Clin Cancer Res. 2011;17:4719–30.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 68. Li G, Zhang Q, Han Z, Zhu Y, Shen H, Liu Z, et al. IL-7 and
CCR2b co-expression-mediated enhanced CAR-T survival and
infiltration in solid tumors. Front Oncol. 2021;11:734593.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 69. Wang Y, Wang J, Yang X, Yang J, Lu P, Zhao L, et al.
Chemokine receptor CCR2b enhanced anti-tumor function of
chimeric antigen receptor T cells targeting mesothelin in a
non-small-cell lung carcinoma model. Front Immunol.
2021;12:628906.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 70. Luo H, Su J, Sun R, Sun Y, Wang Y, Dong Y, et al.
Coexpression of IL7 and CCL21 increases efficacy of CAR-T
cells in solid tumors without requiring preconditioned
lymphodepletion. Clin Cancer Res. 2020;26:5494–505.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 71. Sasaki T, Sakoda Y, Adachi K, Tokunaga Y, Tamada K.
Therapeutic effects of anti‐GM2 CAR‐T cells expressing IL‐7
and CCL19 for GM2‐positive solid cancer in xenograft model.
Cancer Med. 2023;12:12569–80.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 

72. Trinh T, Adams WA, Calescibetta A, Tu N, Dalton R, So T, et
al. CX3CR1 deficiency-induced TIL tumor restriction as a
novel addition for CAR-T design in solid malignancies.
iScience. 2023;26:106443.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 73. Tchou J, Zhao Y, Levine BL, Zhang PJ, Davis MM, Melenhorst
JJ, et al. Safety and efficacy of intratumoral injections of
chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells in metastatic breast
cancer. Cancer Immunol Res. 2017;5:1152–61.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 74. Hardaway JC, Prince E, Arepally A, Katz SC. Regional
infusion of chimeric antigen receptor T cells to overcome
barriers for solid tumor immunotherapy. J Vasc Interv Radiol.
2018;29:1017–21.
 Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 75. Prapa M, Chiavelli C, Golinelli G, Grisendi G, Bestagno M, Di
Tinco R, et al. GD2 CAR T cells against human glioblastoma.
NPJ Precis Oncol. 2021;5:93.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 76. Katz SC, Burga RA, McCormack E, Wang LJ, Mooring W,
Point GR, et al. Phase I hepatic immunotherapy for
metastases study of intra-arterial chimeric antigen receptor–
modified T-cell therapy for CEA+ liver metastases. Clin
Cancer Res. 2015;21:3149–59.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 77. Katz SC, Hardaway J, Prince E, Guha P, Cunetta M, Moody A,
et al. HITM-SIR: phase Ib trial of intraarterial chimeric
antigen receptor T-cell therapy and selective internal
radiation therapy for CEA+ liver metastases. Cancer Gene
Ther. 2020;27:341–55.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 

78. Tran E, Chinnasamy D, Yu Z, Morgan RA, Lee CC, Restifo NP,
et al. Immune targeting of fibroblast activation protein
triggers recognition of multipotent bone marrow stromal cells
and cachexia, Immune targeting of fibroblast activation
protein triggers recognition of multipotent bone marrow
stromal cells and cachexia. J Exp Med. 2013;210:1125–35.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 79. Wang LC, Lo A, Scholler J, Sun J, Majumdar RS, Kapoor V, et
al. Targeting fibroblast activation protein in tumor stroma
with chimeric antigen receptor T cells can inhibit tumor
growth and augment host immunity without severe toxicity.
Cancer Immunol Res. 2014;2:154–66.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 80. Caruana I, Savoldo B, Hoyos V, Weber G, Liu H, Kim ES, et al.
Heparanase promotes tumor infiltration and antitumor
activity of CAR-redirected T lymphocytes. Nat Med.
2015;21:524–9.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 81. Wang S, Li Y, Xu C, Dong J, Wei J. An oncolytic vaccinia
virus encoding hyaluronidase reshapes the extracellular
matrix to enhance cancer chemotherapy and immunotherapy.
J Immunother Cancer. 2024;12:e008431.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 82. Hingorani SR, Zheng L, Bullock AJ, Seery TE, Harris WP,
Sigal DS, et al. HALO 202: randomized phase II study of
PEGPH20 plus nab-paclitaxel/gemcitabine versus nab-
paclitaxel/gemcitabine in patients with untreated, metastatic
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. J Clin Oncol.
2018;36:359–66.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 83. Ramanathan RK, McDonough SL, Philip PA, Hingorani SR,
Lacy J, Kortmansky JS, et al. Phase IB/II randomized study of

FOLFIRINOX plus pegylated recombinant human
hyaluronidase versus FOLFIRINOX alone in patients with
metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma: SWOG S1313. J Clin
Oncol. 2019;37:1062–9.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 84. Mehrabadi AZ, Ranjbar R, Farzanehpour M, Shahriary A,
Dorostkar R, Hamidinejad MA, et al. Therapeutic potential of
CAR T cell in malignancies: a scoping review. Biomed
Pharmacother. 2022;146:112512.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 85. Marofi F, Motavalli R, Safonov VA, Thangavelu L, Yumashev
AV, Alexander M, et al. CAR T cells in solid tumors:
challenges and opportunities. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2021;12:81.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 86. Zhang H, Dai Z, Wu W, Wang Z, Zhang N, Zhang L, et al.
Regulatory mechanisms of immune checkpoints PD-L1 and
CTLA-4 in cancer. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2021;40:184.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 87. Kornepati AVR, Vadlamudi RK, Curiel TJ. Programmed death
ligand 1 signals in cancer cells. Nat Rev Cancer.
2022;22:174–89.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 88. Abdoli Shadbad M, Hemmat N, Khaze Shahgoli V,
Derakhshani A, Baradaran F, Brunetti O, et al. A systematic
review on PD-1 blockade and PD-1 gene-editing of CAR-T
cells for glioma therapy: from deciphering to personalized
medicine. Front Immunol. 2022;12:788211.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 89. Gray KD, McCloskey JE, Vedvyas Y, Kalloo OR, Eshaky SE,
Yang Y, et al. PD1 blockade enhances ICAM1-directed CAR T

therapeutic efficacy in advanced thyroid cancer. Clin Cancer
Res. 2020;26:6003–16.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 90. Li P, Yang L, Li T, Bin S, Sun B, Huang Y, et al. The third
generation anti-HER2 chimeric antigen receptor mouse T cells
alone or together with anti-PD1 antibody inhibits the growth
of mouse breast tumor cells expressing HER2 in vitro and in
immune competent mice. Front Oncol. 2020;10:1143.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 91. Jaspers JE, Khan JF, Godfrey WD, Lopez AV, Ciampricotti M,
Rudin CM, et al. IL-18–secreting CAR T cells targeting DLL3
are highly effective in small cell lung cancer models. J Clin
Investig. 2023;133:e166028.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 92. Adusumilli PS, Zauderer MG, Rivière I, Solomon SB, Rusch
VW, O'Cearbhaill RE, et al. A phase I trial of regional
mesothelin-targeted CAR T-cell therapy in patients with
malignant pleural disease, in combination with the anti–PD-1
agent pembrolizumab. Cancer Discov. 2021;11:2748–63.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 93. Wang Z, Li N, Feng K, Chen M, Zhang Y, Liu Y, et al. Phase I
study of CAR-T cells with PD-1 and TCR disruption in
mesothelin-positive solid tumors. Cell Mol Immunol.
2021;18:2188–98.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 94. Agarwal S, Aznar MA, Rech AJ, Good CR, Kuramitsu S, Da T,
et al. Deletion of the inhibitory co-receptor CTLA-4 enhances
and invigorates chimeric antigen receptor T cells. Immunity.
2023;56:2388–407.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 

95. Cheng K, Feng X, Chai Z, Wang Z, Liu Z, Yan Z, et al. 4-1BB-
based CAR T cells effectively reverse exhaustion and enhance
the anti-tumor immune response through autocrine PD-L1
scFv antibody. Int J Mol Sci. 2023;24:4197.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 96. Dunn ZS, Qu Y, MacMullan M, Chen X, Cinay G, Wang P.
Secretion of 4-1BB ligand crosslinked to PD-1 checkpoint
inhibitor potentiates chimeric antigen receptor T cell solid
tumor efficacy. Hum Gene Ther. 2023. https://
doi.org/10.1089/hum.2022.068.
 97. Sun C, Wang B, Hao S. Adenosine-A2A receptor pathway in
cancer immunotherapy. Front Immunol. 2022;13:837230.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 98. Masoumi E, Jafarzadeh L, Mirzaei HR, Alishah K, Fallah-
Mehrjardi K, Rostamian H, et al. Genetic and pharmacological
targeting of A2a receptor improves function of anti-
mesothelin CAR T cells. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2020;39:49.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 99. Klysz DD, Fowler C, Malipatlolla M, Stuani L, Freitas KA,
Chen Y, et al. Inosine induces stemness features in CAR-T
cells and enhances potency. Cancer Cell.
2024:S1535610824000084. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ccell.2024.01.002.
 100. Wang Z, Liu Q, Risu N, Fu J, Zou Y, Tang J, et al. Galunisertib
enhances chimeric antigen receptor-modified T cell function.
Eur J Histochem. 2020;64:3122.
 PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 101. Alabanza LM, Xiong Y, Vu B, Webster B, Wu D, Hu P, et al.
Armored BCMA CAR T cells eliminate multiple myeloma and
are resistant to the suppressive effects of TGF-β. Front
Immunol. 2022;13:832645.

Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 102. Qin L, Cui Y, Yuan T, Chen D, Zhao R, Li S, et al. Co-
expression of a PD-L1-specific chimeric switch receptor
augments the efficacy and persistence of CAR T cells via the
CD70-CD27 axis. Nat Commun. 2022;13:6051.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 103. Sukumaran S, Watanabe N, Bajgain P, Raja K, Mohammed S,
Fisher WE, et al. Enhancing the potency and specificity of
engineered T cells for cancer treatment. Cancer Discov.
2018;8:972–87.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 104. June CH, O’Connor RS, Kawalekar OU, Ghassemi S, Milone
MC. CAR T cell immunotherapy for human cancer. Science.
2018;359:1361–5.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 105. Bell M, Gottschalk S. Engineered cytokine signaling to
improve CAR T cell effector function. Front Immunol.
2021;12:684642.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 106. Sauer T, Parikh K, Sharma S, Omer B, Sedloev D, Chen Q, et
al. CD70-specific CAR T cells have potent activity against
acute myeloid leukemia without HSC toxicity. Blood.
2021;138:318–30.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 107. Panowski SH, Srinivasan S, Tan N, Tacheva-Grigorova SK,
Smith B, Mak Y, et al. Preclinical development and evaluation
of allogeneic CAR T cells targeting CD70 for the treatment of
renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Res. 2022;82:2610–24.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 

108. Smirnov S, Mateikovich P, Samochernykh K, Shlyakhto E.
Recent advances on CAR-T signaling pave the way for
prolonged persistence and new modalities in clinic. Front
Immunol. 2024;15:1335424.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 109. Wyatt MM, Huff LW, Nelson MH, Neal LR, Medvec AR,
Rangel Rivera GO, et al. Augmenting TCR signal strength and
ICOS costimulation results in metabolically fit and
therapeutically potent human CAR Th17 cells. Mol Ther.
2023;31:2120–31.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 110. Guedan S, Posey AD Jr, Shaw C, Wing A, Da T, Patel PR, et
al. Enhancing CAR T cell persistence through ICOS and 4-1BB
costimulation. JCI Insight. 2018;3:e96976.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 111. Moreno-Cortes E, Franco-Fuquen P, Garcia-Robledo JE,
Forero J, Booth N, Castro JE. ICOS and OX40 tandem co-
stimulation enhances CAR T-cell cytotoxicity and promotes T-
cell persistence phenotype. Front Oncol. 2023;13:1200914.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 112. Chabannon C, Bonini C. Structure of and signalling through
chimeric antigen receptor. In: Kröger N, Gribben J,
Chabannon C, Yakoub-Agha I, Einsele H, editors. The EBMT/
EHA CAR-T cell handbook. Cham: Springer International
Publishing; 2022. p. 3–5.
 113. Li K, Xu J, Wang J, Lu C, Dai Y, Dai Q, et al. Dominant-
negative transforming growth factor-β receptor-armoured
mesothelin-targeted chimeric antigen receptor T cells slow
tumour growth in a mouse model of ovarian cancer. Cancer
Immunol Immunother. 2023;72:917–28.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 

114. Rana PS, Murphy EV, Kort J, Driscoll JJ. Road testing new
CAR design strategies in multiple myeloma. Front Immunol.
2022;13:957157.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 115. Tang L, Pan S, Wei X, Xu X, Wei Q. Arming CAR-T cells with
cytokines and more: innovations in the fourth-generation
CAR-T development. Mol Ther. 2023;31:3146–62.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 116. Agliardi G, Liuzzi AR, Hotblack A, De Feo D, Núñez N, Stowe
CL, et al. Intratumoral IL-12 delivery empowers CAR-T cell
immunotherapy in a pre-clinical model of glioblastoma. Nat
Commun. 2021;12:444.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 117. Lee E, Murad JP, Christian L, Gibson J, Yamaguchi Y, Cullen
C, et al. Antigen-dependent IL-12 signaling in CAR T cells
promotes regional to systemic disease targeting. Nat
Commun. 2023;14:4737.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 118. Hu B, Ren J, Luo Y, Keith B, Young RM, Scholler J, et al.
Augmentation of antitumor immunity by human and mouse
CAR T cells secreting IL-18. Cell Rep. 2017;20:3025–33.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 119. Waldmann TA, Dubois S, Miljkovic MD, Conlon KC. IL-15 in
the combination immunotherapy of cancer. Front Immunol.
2020;11:868.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 120. Zannikou M, Duffy JT, Levine RN, Seblani M, Liu Q, Presser
A, et al. IL15 modification enables CAR T cells to act as a
dual targeting agent against tumor cells and myeloid-derived
suppressor cells in GBM. J Immunother Cancer.

2023;11:e006239.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 121. Zhou Y, Farooq MA, Ajmal I, He C, Gao Y, Guo D, et al. Co-
expression of IL-4/IL-15-based inverted cytokine receptor in
CAR-T cells overcomes IL-4 signaling in immunosuppressive
pancreatic tumor microenvironment. Biomed Pharmacother.
2023;168:115740.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 122. Zhao Y, Chen J, Andreatta M, Feng B, Xie YQ, Wenes M, et al.
IL-10-expressing CAR T cells resist dysfunction and mediate
durable clearance of solid tumors and metastases. Nat
Biotechnol. 2024. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41587-023-02060-8.
 123. Wang D, Prager BC, Gimple RC, Aguilar B, Alizadeh D, Tang
H, et al. CRISPR screening of CAR T cells and cancer stem
cells reveals critical dependencies for cell-based therapies.
Cancer Discov. 2021;11:1192–211.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 124. Zhou P, Shi H, Huang H, Sun X, Yuan S, Chapman NM, et al.
Single-cell CRISPR screens in vivo map T cell fate regulomes
in cancer. Nature. 2023;624:154–63.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 125. Zheng W, Wei J, Zebley CC, Jones LL, Dhungana Y, Wang YD,
et al. Regnase-1 suppresses TCF-1+ precursor exhausted T-
cell formation to limit CAR–T-cell responses against ALL.
Blood. 2021;138:122–35.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 126. Dong MB, Wang G, Chow RD, Ye L, Zhu L, Dai X, et al.
Systematic immunotherapy target discovery using genome-
scale in vivo CRISPR screens in CD8 T cells. Cell.
2019;178:1189–204.

Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 127. Carnevale J, Shifrut E, Kale N, Nyberg WA, Blaeschke F, Chen
YY, et al. RASA2 ablation in T cells boosts antigen sensitivity
and long-term function. Nature. 2022;609:174–82.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 128. Ye L, Park JJ, Peng L, Yang Q, Chow RD, Dong MB, et al. A
genome-scale gain-of-function CRISPR screen in CD8 T cells
identifies proline metabolism as a means to enhance CAR-T
therapy. Cell Metab. 2022;34:595–614.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 129. Legut M, Gajic Z, Guarino M, Daniloski Z, Rahman JA, Xue X,
et al. A genome-scale screen for synthetic drivers of T cell
proliferation. Nature. 2022;603:728–35.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 130. Morris EC, Neelapu SS, Giavridis T, Sadelain M. Cytokine
release syndrome and associated neurotoxicity in cancer
immunotherapy. Nat Rev Immunol. 2022;22:85–96.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 131. Lee DW, Gardner R, Porter DL, Louis CU, Ahmed N, Jensen
M, et al. Current concepts in the diagnosis and management
of cytokine release syndrome. Blood. 2014;124:188–95.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 132. Norelli M, Camisa B, Barbiera G, Falcone L, Purevdorj A,
Genua M, et al. Monocyte-derived IL-1 and IL-6 are
differentially required for cytokine-release syndrome and
neurotoxicity due to CAR T cells. Nat Med. 2018;24:739–48.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 133. Shimabukuro-Vornhagen A, Gödel P, Subklewe M, Stemmler
HJ, Schlößer HA, Schlaak M, et al. Cytokine release

syndrome. J Immunother Cancer. 2018;6:56.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 134. Pennisi M, Jain T, Santomasso BD, Mead E, Wudhikarn K,
Silverberg ML, et al. Comparing CAR T-cell toxicity grading
systems: application of the ASTCT grading system and
implications for management. Blood Adv. 2020;4:676–86.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 135. Kowolik CM, Topp MS, Gonzalez S, Pfeiffer T, Olivares S,
Gonzalez N, et al. CD28 costimulation provided through a
CD19-specific chimeric antigen receptor enhances in vivo
persistence and antitumor efficacy of adoptively transferred T
cells. Cancer Res. 2006;66:10995–1004.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 136. Brentjens RJ, Latouche JB, Santos E, Marti F, Gong MC,
Lyddane C, et al. Eradication of systemic B-cell tumors by
genetically targeted human T lymphocytes co-stimulated by
CD80 and interleukin-15. Nat Med. 2003;9:279–86.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 137. Imai C, Mihara K, Andreansky M, Nicholson IC, Pui CH,
Geiger TL, et al. Chimeric receptors with 4-1BB signaling
capacity provoke potent cytotoxicity against acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Leukemia. 2004;18:676–84.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 138. Giavridis T, van der Stegen S, Eyquem J, Hamieh M,
Piersigilli A, Sadelain M. CAR T cell-induced cytokine release
syndrome is mediated by macrophages and abated by IL-1
blockade. Nat Med. 2018;24:731–8.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 139. Faulhaber LD, Phuong AQ, Hartsuyker KJ, Cho Y, Mand KK,
Harper SD, et al. Brain capillary obstruction during

neurotoxicity in a mouse model of anti-CD19 chimeric
antigen receptor T-cell therapy. Brain Commun.
2022;4:fcab309.
 Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 140. Vinnakota JM, Biavasco F, Schwabenland M, Chhatbar C,
Adams RC, Erny D, et al. Targeting TGFβ-activated kinase-1
activation in microglia reduces CAR T immune effector cell-
associated neurotoxicity syndrome. Nat Cancer. 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-024-00764-7.
 141. Lee DW, Santomasso BD, Locke FL, Ghobadi A, Turtle CJ,
Brudno JN, et al. ASTCT consensus grading for cytokine
release syndrome and neurologic toxicity associated with
immune effector cells. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant J Am
Soc Blood Marrow Transplant. 2019;25:625–38.
 Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
 142. Strati P, Ahmed S, Furqan F, Fayad LE, Lee HJ, Iyer SP, et al.
Prognostic impact of corticosteroids on efficacy of chimeric
antigen receptor T-cell therapy in large B-cell lymphoma.
Blood. 2021;137:3272–6.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 143. Choe JH, Watchmaker PB, Simic MS, Gilbert RD, Li AW,
Krasnow NA, et al. SynNotch-CAR T cells overcome
challenges of specificity, heterogeneity, and persistence in
treating glioblastoma. Sci Transl Med. 2021;13:eabe7378.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 144. Kloss CC, Condomines M, Cartellieri M, Bachmann M,
Sadelain M. Combinatorial antigen recognition with balanced
signaling promotes selective tumor eradication by engineered
T cells. Nat Biotechnol. 2013;31:71–75.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 145. Fedorov VD, Themeli M, Sadelain M. PD-1- and CTLA-4-based

inhibitory chimeric antigen receptors (iCARs) divert off-target
immunotherapy responses. Sci Transl Med. 2013;5:215ra172.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 146. Richman SA, Wang LC, Moon EK, Khire UR, Albelda SM,
Milone MC, et al. Ligand-induced degradation of a CAR
permits reversible remote control of CAR T cell activity in
vitro and in vivo. Mol Ther J Am Soc Gene Ther.
2020;28:1600–13.
 Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
 147. Giordano-Attianese G, Gainza P, Gray-Gaillard E, Cribioli E,
Shui S, Kim S, et al. A computationally designed chimeric
antigen receptor provides a small-molecule safety switch for
T-cell therapy. Nat Biotechnol. 2020;38:426–32.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 148. Juillerat A, Tkach D, Busser BW, Temburni S, Valton J,
Duclert A, et al. Modulation of chimeric antigen receptor
surface expression by a small molecule switch. BMC
Biotechnol. 2019;19:44.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 149. Zajc CU, Dobersberger M, Schaffner I, Mlynek G, Pühringer D,
Salzer B, et al. A conformation-specific ON-switch for
controlling CAR T cells with an orally available drug. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2020;117:14926–35.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 150. Wu C-Y, Roybal KT, Puchner EM, Onuffer J, Lim WA. Remote
control of therapeutic T cells through a small molecule-gated
chimeric receptor. Science. 2015;350:aab4077.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 151. Labanieh L, Majzner RG, Klysz D, Sotillo E, Fisher CJ, Vilches-
Moure JG, et al. Enhanced safety and efficacy of protease-

regulated CAR-T cell receptors. Cell. 2022;185:1745–63.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 152. Wang X, Meng F, Li X, Xue L, Chen A, Qiu Y, et al.
Nanomodified switch induced precise and moderate
activation of CAR-T cells for solid tumors. Adv Sci.
2023;10:e2205044.
 Article  Google Scholar 
 153. Wolf NK, Kissiov DU, Raulet DH. Roles of natural killer cells
in immunity to cancer, and applications to immunotherapy.
Nat Rev Immunol. 2023;23:90–105.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 154. Chan CJ, Smyth MJ, Martinet L. Molecular mechanisms of
natural killer cell activation in response to cellular stress. Cell
Death Differ. 2014;21:5–14.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 155. Vivier E, Tomasello E, Baratin M, Walzer T, Ugolini S.
Functions of natural killer cells. Nat Immunol. 2008;9:503–
10.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 156. Shifrin N, Raulet DH, Ardolino M. NK cell self tolerance,
responsiveness and missing self recognition. Semin Immunol.
2014;26:138–44.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 157. Joncker NT, Fernandez NC, Treiner E, Vivier E, Raulet DH.
NK cell responsiveness is tuned commensurate with the
number of inhibitory receptors for self-MHC class I: the
rheostat model. J Immunol. 2009;182:4572–80.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 

158. Ljunggren H-G, Kärre K. In search of the ‘missing self’: MHC
molecules and NK cell recognition. Immunol Today.
1990;11:237–44.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 159. Anegón I, Cuturi MC, Trinchieri G, Perussia B. Interaction of
Fc receptor (CD16) ligands induces transcription of
interleukin 2 receptor (CD25) and lymphokine genes and
expression of their products in human natural killer cells. J
Exp Med. 1988;167:452–72.
 Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 160. Ochoa MC, Minute L, Rodriguez I, Garasa S, Perez-Ruiz E,
Inogés S, et al. Antibody‐dependent cell cytotoxicity:
immunotherapy strategies enhancing effector NK cells.
Immunol Cell Biol. 2017;95:347–55.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 161. Orange JS. Formation and function of the lytic NK-cell
immunological synapse. Nat Rev Immunol. 2008;8:713–25.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 162. Topham NJ, Hewitt EW. Natural killer cell cytotoxicity: how
do they pull the trigger? Immunology. 2009;128:7–15.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 163. Prager I, Liesche C, van Ooijen H, Urlaub D, Verron Q,
Sandström N, et al. NK cells switch from granzyme B to death
receptor-mediated cytotoxicity during serial killing. J Exp
Med. 2019;216:2113–27.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 164. Crouse J, Xu HC, Lang PA, Oxenius A. NK cells regulating T
cell responses: mechanisms and outcome. Trends Immunol.
2015;36:49–58.

Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 165. Hercend T, Farace F, Baume D, Charpentier F, Droz JP,
Triebel F, et al. Immunotherapy with lymphokine-activated
natural killer cells and recombinant interleukin-2: a feasibility
trial in metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J Biol Response Mod.
1990;9:546–55.
 CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 166. Berrien-Elliott MM, Jacobs MT, Fehniger TA. Allogeneic
natural killer cell therapy. Blood. 2023;141:856–68.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 167. Mitra A, Barua A, Huang L, Ganguly S, Feng Q, He B. From
bench to bedside: the history and progress of CAR T cell
therapy. Front Immunol. 2023;14:1188049.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 168. Bald T, Krummel MF, Smyth MJ, Barry KC. The NK cell-
cancer cycle: advances and new challenges in NK cell-based
immunotherapies. Nat Immunol. 2020;21:835–47.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 169. Cózar B, Greppi M, Carpentier S, Narni-Mancinelli E,
Chiossone L, Vivier E. Tumor-infiltrating natural killer cells.
Cancer Discov. 2021;11:34–44.
 Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 170. Peng L-S, Zhang JY, Teng YS, Zhao YL, Wang TT, Mao FY, et
al. Tumor-associated monocytes/macrophages impair NK-cell
function via TGFβ1 in human gastric cancer. Cancer Immunol
Res. 2017;5:248–56.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 171. Zhang Q-F, Yin WW, Xia Y, Yi YY, He QF, Wang X, et al.
Liver-infiltrating CD11b-CD27- NK subsets account for NK-

cell dysfunction in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma
and are associated with tumor progression. Cell Mol
Immunol. 2017;14:819–29.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 172. Zheng X, Qian Y, Fu B, Jiao D, Jiang Y, Chen P, et al.
Mitochondrial fragmentation limits NK cell-based tumor
immunosurveillance. Nat Immunol. 2019;20:1656–67.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 173. Garcia-Chagollan M, Carranza-Torres IE, Carranza-Rosales P,
Guzmán-Delgado NE, Ramírez-Montoya H, Martínez-Silva
MG, et al. Expression of NK cell surface receptors in breast
cancer tissue as predictors of resistance to antineoplastic
treatment. Technol Cancer Res Treat.
2018;17:1533033818764499.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 174. Mamessier E, Sylvain A, Thibult ML, Houvenaeghel G,
Jacquemier J, Castellano R, et al. Human breast cancer cells
enhance self tolerance by promoting evasion from NK cell
antitumor immunity. J Clin Investig. 2011;121:3609–22.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 175. Terrén I, Orrantia A, Vitallé J, Zenarruzabeitia O, Borrego F.
NK cell metabolism and tumor microenvironment. Front
Immunol. 2019;10:2278.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 176. Cluxton CD, Spillane C, O'Toole SA, Sheils O, Gardiner CM,
O'Leary JJ. Suppression of natural killer cell NKG2D and
CD226 anti-tumour cascades by platelet cloaked cancer cells:
implications for the metastatic cascade. PLoS ONE.
2019;14:e0211538.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 

177. Close HJ, Stead LF, Nsengimana J, Reilly KA, Droop A,
Wurdak H, et al. Expression profiling of single cells and
patient cohorts identifies multiple immunosuppressive
pathways and an altered NK cell phenotype in glioblastoma.
Clin Exp Immunol. 2020;200:33–44.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 178. Park A, Lee Y, Kim MS, Kang YJ, Park YJ, Jung H, et al.
Prostaglandin E2 secreted by thyroid cancer cells contributes
to immune escape through the suppression of natural killer
(NK) cell cytotoxicity and NK cell differentiation. Front
Immunol. 2018;9:1859.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 179. Zhang Y, Wallace DL, de Lara CM, Ghattas H, Asquith B,
Worth A, et al. In vivo kinetics of human natural killer cells:
the effects of ageing and acute and chronic viral infection.
Immunology. 2007;121:258–65.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 180. Gill S, Vasey AE, De Souza A, Baker J, Smith AT, Kohrt HE, et
al. Rapid development of exhaustion and down-regulation of
eomesodermin limit the antitumor activity of adoptively
transferred murine natural killer cells. Blood. 2012;119:5758–
68.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 181. Ménard C, Blay JY, Borg C, Michiels S, Ghiringhelli F, Robert
C, et al. Natural killer cell IFN-γ levels predict long-term
survival with imatinib mesylate therapy in gastrointestinal
stromal tumor–bearing patients. Cancer Res. 2009;69:3563–9.
 Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 182. Pernot S, Terme M, Radosevic-Robin N, Castan F, Badoual C,
Marcheteau E, et al. Infiltrating and peripheral immune cell
analysis in advanced gastric cancer according to the Lauren
classification and its prognostic significance. Gastric Cancer.

2020;23:73–81.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 183. Semeraro M, Rusakiewicz S, Minard-Colin V, Delahaye NF,
Enot D, Vély F, et al. Clinical impact of the NKp30/B7-H6
axis in high-risk neuroblastoma patients. Sci Transl Med.
2015;7:283.
 Article  Google Scholar 
 184. Xiao L, Cen D, Gan H, Sun Y, Huang N, Xiong H, et al.
Adoptive transfer of NKG2D CAR mRNA-engineered natural
killer cells in colorectal cancer patients. Mol Ther.
2019;27:1114–25.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 185. Kremer V, Ligtenberg MA, Zendehdel R, Seitz C,
Duivenvoorden A, Wennerberg E, et al. Genetic engineering
of human NK cells to express CXCR2 improves migration to
renal cell carcinoma. J Immunother Cancer. 2017;5:73.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 186. Ng YY, Tay JCK, Wang S. CXCR1 expression to improve anti-
cancer efficacy of intravenously injected CAR-NK cells in mice
with peritoneal xenografts. Mol Ther Oncolytics. 2020;16:75–
85.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 187. Bonanni V, Antonangeli F, Santoni A, Bernardini G. Targeting
of CXCR3 improves anti-myeloma efficacy of adoptively
transferred activated natural killer cells. J Immunother
Cancer. 2019;7:290.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 188. Lee J, Kang TH, Yoo W, Choi H, Jo S, Kong K, et al. An
antibody designed to improve adoptive NK-cell therapy
inhibits pancreatic cancer progression in a murine model.

Cancer Immunol Res. 2019;7:219–29.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 189. Melaiu O, Lucarini V, Cifaldi L, Fruci D. Influence of the
tumor microenvironment on NK cell function in solid tumors.
Front Immunol. 2020;10:3038.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 190. Trotta R, Dal Col J, Yu J, Ciarlariello D, Thomas B, Zhang X,
et al. TGF-β utilizes SMAD3 to inhibit CD16-mediated IFN-γ
production and antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity in
human NK cells. J Immunol. 2008;181:3784–92.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 191. Friese MA, Wischhusen J, Wick W, Weiler M, Eisele G, Steinle
A, et al. RNA interference targeting transforming growth
factor-β enhances NKG2D-mediated antiglioma immune
response, inhibits glioma cell migration and invasiveness, and
abrogates tumorigenicity in vivo. Cancer Res. 2004;64:7596–
603.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 192. Crane CA, Han SJ, Barry JJ, Ahn BJ, Lanier LL, Parsa AT.
TGF-beta downregulates the activating receptor NKG2D on
NK cells and CD8+ T cells in glioma patients.
Neurooncology. 2010;12:7–13.
 CAS  Google Scholar 
 193. Kopp H-G, Placke T, Salih HR. Platelet-derived transforming
growth factor-β down-regulates NKG2D thereby inhibiting
natural killer cell antitumor reactivity. Cancer Res.
2009;69:7775–83.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 194. Yvon ES, Burga R, Powell A, Cruz CR, Fernandes R, Barese C,
et al. Cord blood natural killer cells expressing a dominant

negative TGF-β receptor: implications for adoptive
immunotherapy for glioblastoma. Cytotherapy. 2017;19:408–
18.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 195. Rouce RH, Shaim H, Sekine T, Weber G, Ballard B, Ku S, et al.
The TGF-β/SMAD pathway is an important mechanism for NK
cell immune evasion in childhood B-acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Leukemia. 2016;30:800–11.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 196. Shaim H, Shanley M, Basar R, Daher M, Gumin J, Zamler DB,
et al. Targeting the αv integrin/TGF-β axis improves natural
killer cell function against glioblastoma stem cells. J Clin
Investig. 2021;131:e142116.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 197. Chambers AM, Wang J, Lupo KB, Yu H, Atallah Lanman NM,
Matosevic S. Adenosinergic signaling alters natural killer cell
functional responses. Front Immunol. 2018;9:2533.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 198. Antonioli L, Blandizzi C, Pacher P, Haskó G. Immunity,
inflammation and cancer: a leading role for adenosine. Nat
Rev Cancer. 2013;13:842–57.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 199. Ryzhov S, Novitskiy SV, Goldstein AE, Biktasova A, Blackburn
MR, Biaggioni I, et al. Adenosinergic regulation of the
expansion and immunosuppressive activity of CD11b+Gr1+
cells. J Immunol. 2011;187:6120–9.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 200. Sun X, Wu Y, Gao W, Enjyoji K, Csizmadia E, Müller CE, et al.
CD39/ENTPD1 expression by CD4+Foxp3+ regulatory T
cells promotes hepatic metastatic tumor growth in mice.

Gastroenterology. 2010;139:1030–40.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 201. Augustin RC, Leone RD, Naing A, Fong L, Bao R, Luke JJ.
Next steps for clinical translation of adenosine pathway
inhibition in cancer immunotherapy. J Immunother Cancer.
2022;10:e004089.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 202. Young A, Ngiow SF, Barkauskas DS, Sult E, Hay C, Blake SJ,
et al. Co-inhibition of CD73 and A2AR adenosine signaling
improves anti-tumor immune responses. Cancer Cell.
2016;30:391–403.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 203. Young A, Ngiow SF, Gao Y, Patch AM, Barkauskas DS,
Messaoudene M, et al. A2AR adenosine signaling suppresses
natural killer cell maturation in the tumor microenvironment.
Cancer Res. 2018;78:1003–16.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 204. Giuffrida L, Sek K, Henderson MA, Lai J, Chen A, Meyran D,
et al. CRISPR/Cas9 mediated deletion of the adenosine A2A
receptor enhances CAR T cell efficacy. Nat Commun.
2021;12:3236.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 205. Stojanovic A, Fiegler N, Brunner-Weinzierl M, Cerwenka A.
CTLA-4 is expressed by activated mouse NK cells and inhibits
NK cell IFN-γ production in response to mature dendritic
cells. J Immunol. 2014;192:4184–91.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 206. Davis Z, Felices M, Lenvik T, Badal S, Walker JT, Hinderlie P,
et al. Low-density PD-1 expression on resting human natural
killer cells is functional and upregulated after transplantation.

Blood Adv. 2021;5:1069–80.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 207. Sanseviero E, O'Brien EM, Karras JR, Shabaneh TB, Aksoy BA,
Xu W, et al. Anti–CTLA-4 activates intratumoral NK cells and
combined with IL15/IL15Rα complexes enhances tumor
control. Cancer Immunol Res. 2019;7:1371–80.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 208. Hsu J, Hodgins JJ, Marathe M, Nicolai CJ, Bourgeois-
Daigneault MC, Trevino TN, et al. Contribution of NK cells to
immunotherapy mediated by PD-1/PD-L1 blockade. J Clin
Investig. 2018;128:4654–68.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 209. Creelan BC, Antonia SJ. The NKG2A immune checkpoint—a
new direction in cancer immunotherapy. Nat Rev Clin Oncol.
2019;16:277–8.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 210. Laskowski TJ, Biederstädt A, Rezvani K. Natural killer cells in
antitumour adoptive cell immunotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer.
2022;22:557–75.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 211. da Silva IP, Gallois A, Jimenez-Baranda S, Khan S, Anderson
AC, Kuchroo VK, et al. Reversal of NK-cell exhaustion in
advanced melanoma by Tim-3 blockade. Cancer Immunol
Res. 2014;2:410–22.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 212. Zhang Q, Bi J, Zheng X, Chen Y, Wang H, Wu W, et al.
Blockade of the checkpoint receptor TIGIT prevents NK cell
exhaustion and elicits potent anti-tumor immunity. Nat
Immunol. 2018;19:723–32.

Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 213. André P, Denis C, Soulas C, Bourbon-Caillet C, Lopez J,
Arnoux T, et al. Anti-NKG2A mAb is a checkpoint inhibitor
that promotes anti-tumor immunity by unleashing both T and
NK cells. Cell. 2018;175:1731–43.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 214. Miller JS, Soignier Y, Panoskaltsis-Mortari A, McNearney SA,
Yun GH, Fautsch SK, et al. Successful adoptive transfer and in
vivo expansion of human haploidentical NK cells in patients
with cancer. Blood. 2005;105:3051–7.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 215. Bachanova V, Cooley S, Defor TE, Verneris MR, Zhang B,
McKenna DH, et al. Clearance of acute myeloid leukemia by
haploidentical natural killer cells is improved using IL-2
diphtheria toxin fusion protein. Blood. 2014;123:3855–63.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 216. Liu E, Marin D, Banerjee P, Macapinlac HA, Thompson P,
Basar R, et al. Use of CAR-transduced natural killer cells in
CD19-positive lymphoid tumors. N Engl J Med.
2020;382:545–53.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 217. Marin D, Li Y, Basar R, Rafei H, Daher M, Dou J, et al. Safety,
efficacy and determinants of response of allogeneic CD19-
specific CAR-NK cells in CD19+ B cell tumors: a phase 1/2
trial. Nat Med. 2024;30:772–84.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 218. Daher M, Basar R, Gokdemir E, Baran N, Uprety N, Nunez
Cortes AK, et al. Targeting a cytokine checkpoint enhances
the fitness of armored cord blood CAR-NK cells. Blood.
2021;137:624–36.

Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 219. Mansour AG, Teng KY, Li Z, Zhu Z, Chen H, Tian L, et al. Off-
the-shelf CAR-engineered natural killer cells targeting FLT3
enhance killing of acute myeloid leukemia. Blood Adv.
2023;7:6225–39.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 220. Teng K-Y, Mansour AG, Zhu Z, Li Z, Tian L, Ma S, et al. Off-
the-shelf prostate stem cell antigen-directed chimeric antigen
receptor natural killer cell therapy to treat pancreatic cancer.
Gastroenterology. 2022;162:1319–33.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 221. Cerwenka A, Lanier LL. Natural killer cell memory in
infection, inflammation and cancer. Nat Rev Immunol.
2016;16:112–23.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 222. Farber DL, Netea MG, Radbruch A, Rajewsky K, Zinkernagel
RM. Immunological memory: lessons from the past and a look
to the future. Nat Rev Immunol. 2016;16:124–8.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 223. Shapiro RM, Birch GC, Hu G, Vergara Cadavid J, Nikiforow S,
Baginska J, et al. Expansion, persistence, and efficacy of
donor memory-like NK cells infused for posttransplant
relapse. J Clin Investig. 2022;132:e154334.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 224. Romee R, Rosario M, Berrien-Elliott MM, Wagner JA, Jewell
BA, Schappe T, et al. Cytokine-induced memory-like natural
killer cells exhibit enhanced responses against myeloid
leukemia. Sci Transl Med. 2016;8:357.
 Article  Google Scholar 

225. Bednarski JJ, Zimmerman C, Berrien-Elliott MM, Foltz JA,
Becker-Hapak M, Neal CC, et al. Donor memory-like NK cells
persist and induce remissions in pediatric patients with
relapsed AML after transplant. Blood. 2022;139:1670–83.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 226. Dong H, Ham JD, Hu G, Xie G, Vergara J, Liang Y, et al.
Memory-like NK cells armed with a neoepitope-specific CAR
exhibit potent activity against NPM1 mutated acute myeloid
leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2022;119:e2122379119.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 227. Gasser S, Orsulic S, Brown EJ, Raulet DH. The DNA damage
pathway regulates innate immune system ligands of the
NKG2D receptor. Nature. 2005;436:1186–90.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 228. Leivas A, Valeri A, Córdoba L, García-Ortiz A, Ortiz A,
Sánchez-Vega L, et al. NKG2D-CAR-transduced natural killer
cells efficiently target multiple myeloma. Blood Cancer J.
2021;11:146.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 229. Eisenberg V, Shamalov K, Meir S, Hoogi S, Sarkar R, Pinker S,
et al. Targeting multiple tumors using T-cells engineered to
express a natural cytotoxicity receptor 2-based chimeric
receptor. Front Immunol. 2017;8:1212.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 230. Tal Y, Yaakobi S, Horovitz-Fried M, Safyon E, Rosental B,
Porgador A, et al. An NCR1-based chimeric receptor endows
T-cells with multiple anti-tumor specificities. Oncotarget.
2014;5:10949–58.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 231. Li Y, Hermanson DL, Moriarity BS, Kaufman DS. Human iPSC-

derived natural killer cells engineered with chimeric antigen
receptors enhance anti-tumor activity. Cell Stem Cell.
2018;23:181–92.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 232. Lanier LL, Phillips JH. NK cell recognition of major
histocompatibility complex class I molecules. Semin Immunol.
1995;7:75–82.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 233. Barrow AD, Martin CJ, Colonna M. The natural cytotoxicity
receptors in health and disease. Front Immunol. 2019;10:909.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 234. Siegler EL, Zhu Y, Wang P, Yang L. Off-the-shelf CAR-NK cells
for cancer immunotherapy. Cell Stem Cell. 2018;23:160–1.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 235. Gong JH, Maki G, Klingemann HG. Characterization of a
human cell line (NK-92) with phenotypical and functional
characteristics of activated natural killer cells. Leukemia.
1994;8:652–8.
 CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 236. Tang X, Yang L, Li Z, Nalin AP, Dai H, Xu T, et al. First-in-
man clinical trial of CAR NK-92 cells: safety test of CD33-CAR
NK-92 cells in patients with relapsed and refractory acute
myeloid leukemia. Am J Cancer Res. 2018;8:1083–9.
 CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 237. Hermanson DL, Kaufman DS. Utilizing chimeric antigen
receptors to direct natural killer cell activity. Front Immunol.
2015;6:195.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 

238. Drexler H, Matsuo Y. Malignant hematopoietic cell lines: in
vitro models for the study of natural killer cell leukemia–
lymphoma. Leukemia. 2000;14:777–82.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 239. Freud AG, Mundy-Bosse BL, Yu J, Caligiuri MA. The broad
spectrum of human natural killer cell diversity. Immunity.
2017;47:820–33.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 240. Lamers-Kok N, Panella D, Georgoudaki AM, Liu H, Özkazanc
D, Kučerová L, et al. Natural killer cells in clinical
development as non-engineered, engineered, and combination
therapies. J Hematol Oncol. 2022;15:164.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 241. Luevano M, Daryouzeh M, Alnabhan R, Querol S, Khakoo S,
Madrigal A, et al. The unique profile of cord blood natural
killer cells balances incomplete maturation and effective
killing function upon activation. Hum Immunol.
2012;73:248–57.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 242. Dalle J-H, Menezes J, Wagner E, Blagdon M, Champagne J,
Champagne MA, et al. Characterization of cord blood natural
killer cells: implications for transplantation and neonatal
infections. Pediatr Res. 2005;57:649–55.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 243. Dolstra H, Roeven M, Spanholtz J, Hangalapura BN, Tordoir
M, Maas F, et al. Successful transfer of umbilical cord blood
CD34+ hematopoietic stem and progenitor-derived NK cells
in older acute myeloid leukemia patients. Clin Cancer Res.
2017;23:4107–18.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 

244. Takahashi K, Yamanaka S. Induction of pluripotent stem cells
from mouse embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by
defined factors. Cell. 2006;126:663–76.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 245. Zhu H, Blum RH, Bjordahl R, Gaidarova S, Rogers P, Lee TT,
et al. Pluripotent stem cell–derived NK cells with high-affinity
noncleavable CD16a mediate improved antitumor activity.
Blood. 2020;135:399–410.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 246. Goodridge JP, Mahmood S, Zhu H, Gaidarova S, Blum R,
Bjordahl R, et al. FT596: translation of first-of-kind multi-
antigen targeted off-the-shelf CAR-NK cell with engineered
persistence for the treatment of B cell malignancies. Blood.
2019;134:301–301.
 Article  Google Scholar 
 247. Bjordahl R, Gaidarova S, Woan K, Cichocki F, Bonello G,
Robinson M, et al. FT538: preclinical development of an off-
the-shelf adoptive NK cell immunotherapy with targeted
disruption of CD38 to prevent anti-CD38 antibody-mediated
fratricide and enhance ADCC in multiple myeloma when
combined with daratumumab. Blood. 2019;134:133–133.
 Article  Google Scholar 
 248. Myers JA, Miller JS. Exploring the NK cell platform for cancer
immunotherapy. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2021;18:85–100.
 Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 249. Zhu H, Blum RH, Bernareggi D, Ask EH, Wu Z, Hoel HJ, et al.
Metabolic reprograming via deletion of CISH in human iPSC-
derived NK cells promotes in vivo persistence and enhances
anti-tumor activity. Cell Stem Cell. 2020;27:224–37.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 

250. Sayitoglu EC, Georgoudaki AM, Chrobok M, Ozkazanc D,
Josey BJ, Arif M, et al. Boosting natural killer cell-mediated
targeting of sarcoma through DNAM-1 and NKG2D. Front
Immunol. 2020;11:40.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 251. Peng L, Renauer PA, Sferruzza G, Yang L, Zou, Y, Fang Z, et
al. In vivo AAV–SB-CRISPR screens of tumor-infiltrating
primary NK cells identify genetic checkpoints of CAR-NK
therapy. Nat Biotechnol. 2024. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41587-024-02282-4.
 252. Li Y, Basar R, Wang G, Liu E, Moyes JS, Li L, et al. KIR-based
inhibitory CARs overcome CAR-NK cell trogocytosis-mediated
fratricide and tumor escape. Nat Med. 2022;28:2133–44.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 253. Hsi ED, Steinle R, Balasa B, Szmania S, Draksharapu A, Shum
BP, et al. CS1, a potential new therapeutic antibody target for
the treatment of multiple myeloma. Clin Cancer Res J Am
Assoc Cancer Res. 2008;14:2775–84.
 Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
 254. Park JH, Rivière I, Gonen M, Wang X, Sénéchal B, Curran KJ,
et al. Long-term follow-up of CD19 CAR therapy in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2018;378:449–59.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 255. Brudno JN, Somerville RP, Shi V, Rose JJ, Halverson DC,
Fowler DH, et al. Allogeneic T cells that express an anti-CD19
chimeric antigen receptor induce remissions of B-cell
malignancies that progress after allogeneic hematopoietic
stem-cell transplantation without causing graft-versus-host
disease. J Clin Oncol J Am Soc Clin Oncol. 2016;34:1112–21.
 Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
 256. Mallapaty S. Cutting-edge CAR-T cancer therapy is now made

in India - at one-tenth the cost. Nature. 2024;627:709–10.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 257. Benjamin R, Graham C, Yallop D, Jozwik A, Mirci-Danicar
OC, Lucchini G, et al. Genome-edited, donor-derived
allogeneic anti-CD19 chimeric antigen receptor T cells in
paediatric and adult B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia:
results of two phase 1 studies. Lancet. 2020;396:1885–94.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 258. Benjamin R, Jain N, Maus MV, Boissel N, Graham C, Jozwik
A, et al. UCART19, a first-in-class allogeneic anti-CD19
chimeric antigen receptor T-cell therapy for adults with
relapsed or refractory B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
(CALM): a phase 1, dose-escalation trial. Lancet Haematol.
2022;9:e833–e843.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 259. Mailankody S, Matous JV, Chhabra S, Liedtke M, Sidana S,
Oluwole OO, et al. Allogeneic BCMA-targeting CAR T cells in
relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma: phase 1 UNIVERSAL
trial interim results. Nat Med. 2023;29:422–9.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 260. Chiesa R, Georgiadis C, Syed F, Zhan H, Etuk A, Gkazi SA, et
al. Base-edited CAR7 T cells for relapsed T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2023;389:899–910.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 261. Liu E, Tong Y, Dotti G, Shaim H, Savoldo B, Mukherjee M, et
al. Cord blood NK cells engineered to express IL-15 and a
CD19-targeted CAR show long-term persistence and potent
antitumor activity. Leukemia. 2018;32:520–31.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 262. Duygu B, Olieslagers TI, Groeneweg M, Voorter CEM, Wieten

LHLA, et al. Molecules as immune checkpoints for NK cell
alloreactivity and anti-viral immunity in kidney
transplantation. Front Immunol. 2021;12:680480.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 263. Poirot L, Philip B, Schiffer-Mannioui C, Le Clerre D, Chion-
Sotinel I, Derniame S, et al. Multiplex genome-edited T-cell
manufacturing platform for ‘off-the-shelf’ adoptive T-cell
immunotherapies. Cancer Res. 2015;75:3853–64.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 264. Jasinski-Bergner S, Eckstein M, Taubert H, Wach S, Fiebig C,
Strick R, et al. The human leukocyte antigen G as an immune
escape mechanism and novel therapeutic target in urological
tumors. Front Immunol. 2022;13:811200.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 265. Neelapu SS, Locke FL, Bartlett NL, Lekakis LJ, Miklos DB,
Jacobson CA, et al. Axicabtagene ciloleucel CAR T-cell
therapy in refractory large B-cell lymphoma. N Engl J Med.
2017;377:2531–44.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 266. Shi J, Tricot G, Szmania S, Rosen N, Garg TK, Malaviarachchi
PA, et al. Infusion of haplo‐identical killer immunoglobulin‐
like receptor ligand mismatched NK cells for relapsed
myeloma in the setting of autologous stem cell
transplantation. Br J Haematol. 2008;143:641–53.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 267. Björklund AT, Carlsten M, Sohlberg E, Liu LL, Clancy T,
Karimi M, et al. Complete remission with reduction of high-
risk clones following haploidentical NK-cell therapy against
MDS and AML. Clin Cancer Res. 2018;24:1834–44.
 Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 

268. Alnaggar M, Lin M, Mesmar A, Liang S, Qaid A, Xu K, et al.
Allogenic natural killer cell immunotherapy combined with
irreversible electroporation for stage IV hepatocellular
carcinoma: survival outcome. Cell Physiol Biochem.
2018;48:1882–93.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 269. Zhang X, Guo Y, Ji Y, Gao Y, Zhang M, Liu Y, et al. Cytokine
release syndrome after modified CAR-NK therapy in an
advanced non-small cell lung cancer patient: a case report.
Cell Transplant. 2022;31:096368972210942.
 Article  Google Scholar 
 270. Oei V, Siernicka M, Graczyk-Jarzynka A, Hoel HJ, Yang W,
Palacios D, et al. Intrinsic functional potential of NK-cell
subsets constrains retargeting driven by chimeric antigen
receptors. Cancer Immunol Res. 2018;6:467–80.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 271. Touat M, Li YY, Boynton AN, Spurr LF, Iorgulescu JB,
Bohrson CL, et al. Mechanisms and therapeutic implications
of hypermutation in gliomas. Nature. 2020;580:517–23.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 272. Ishigami S, Natsugoe S, Tokuda K, Nakajo A, Che X, Iwashige
H, et al. Prognostic value of intratumoral natural killer cells
in gastric carcinoma. Cancer. 2000;88:577–83.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 273. Villegas FR, Coca S, Villarrubia VG, Jiménez R, Chillón MJ,
Jareño J, et al. Prognostic significance of tumor infiltrating
natural killer cells subset CD57 in patients with squamous cell
lung cancer. Lung Cancer. 2002;35:23–28.
 Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 274. Carlsten M, Childs RW. Genetic manipulation of NK cells for

cancer immunotherapy: techniques and clinical implications.
Front Immunol. 2015;6:266.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 275. Barrett DM, Singh N, Porter DL, Grupp SA, June CH. Chimeric
antigen receptor therapy for cancer. Annu Rev Med.
2014;65:333–47.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 276. Streltsova MA, Barsov E, Erokhina SA, Kovalenko EI.
Retroviral gene transfer into primary human NK cells
activated by IL-2 and K562 feeder cells expressing membrane-
bound IL-21. J Immunol Methods. 2017;450:90–94.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 277. Cavazza A, Moiani A, Mavilio F. Mechanisms of retroviral
integration and mutagenesis. Hum Gene Ther. 2013;24:119–
31.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 278. Hacein-Bey-Abina S, Von Kalle C, Schmidt M, McCormack
MP, Wulffraat N, Leboulch P, et al. LMO2-associated clonal T
cell proliferation in two patients after gene therapy for SCID-
X1. Science. 2003;302:415–9.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 279. Hacein-Bey-Abina S, Garrigue A, Wang GP, Soulier J, Lim A,
Morillon E, et al. Insertional oncogenesis in 4 patients after
retrovirus-mediated gene therapy of SCID-X1. J Clin Investig.
2008;118:3132–42.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 280. Kustikova O, Fehse B, Modlich U, Yang M, Düllmann J,
Kamino K, et al. Clonal dominance of hematopoietic stem
cells triggered by retroviral gene marking. Science.
2005;308:1171–4.

Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 281. Sutlu T, Nyström S, Gilljam M, Stellan B, Applequist SE, Alici
E. Inhibition of intracellular antiviral defense mechanisms
augments lentiviral transduction of human natural killer cells:
implications for gene therapy. Hum Gene Ther.
2012;23:1090–1100.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 282. Micucci F, Zingoni A, Piccoli M, Frati L, Santoni A, Galandrini
R. High-efficient lentiviral vector-mediated gene transfer into
primary human NK cells. Exp Hematol. 2006;34:1344–52.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 283. Tran J, Kung SKP. Lentiviral vectors mediate stable and
efficient gene delivery into primary murine natural killer
cells. Mol Ther J Am Soc Gene Ther. 2007;15:1331–9.
 Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
 284. Allan D, Chakraborty M, Waller GC, Hochman MJ,
Poolcharoen A, Reger RN, et al. Systematic improvements in
lentiviral transduction of primary human natural killer cells
undergoing ex vivo expansion. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev.
2021;20:559–71.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 285. Kruschinski A, Moosmann A, Poschke I, Norell H,
Chmielewski M, Seliger B, et al. Engineering antigen-specific
primary human NK cells against HER-2 positive carcinomas.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008;105:17481–6.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 286. Pfefferle A, Jacobs B, Haroun-Izquierdo A, Kveberg L,
Sohlberg E, Malmberg KJ. Deciphering natural killer cell
homeostasis. Front Immunol. 2020;11:812.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 

287. Gauthier J, Bezerra ED, Hirayama AV, Fiorenza S, Sheih A,
Chou CK, et al. Factors associated with outcomes after a
second CD19-targeted CAR T-cell infusion for refractory B-cell
malignancies. Blood. 2021;137:323–35.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 288. Patel K, Bachanova V, Goodman AM, Pagel JM, Griffis K,
Anderson M, et al. Phase I study of FT516, an off-the-shelf
iPSC-derived NK cell therapy, in combination with rituximab
in patients with relapsed/refractory B-cell lymphoma. Blood.
2021;138:3873–3873.
 Article  Google Scholar 
 289. Verdun N, Marks P. Secondary cancers after chimeric antigen
receptor T-cell therapy. N Engl J Med. 2024;390:584–6.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 290. Willyard C. Do cutting-edge CAR-T-cell therapies cause
cancer? What the data say. Nature. 2024;629:22–24.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 291. Müller F, Taubmann J, Bucci L, Wilhelm A, Bergmann C,
Völkl S, et al. CD19 CAR T-cell therapy in autoimmune
disease—a case series with follow-up. N Engl J Med.
2024;390:687–700.
 Article  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 292. Carvalho T. First two patients receive CAR T cell therapy for
HIV. Nat Med. 2023;29:1290–1.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 293. Tiberghien P, Ferrand C, Lioure B, Milpied N, Angonin R,
Deconinck E, et al. Administration of herpes simplex-
thymidine kinase-expressing donor T cells with a T-cell-
depleted allogeneic marrow graft. Blood. 2001;97:63–72.

Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 294. Shy BR, Vykunta VS, Ha A, Talbot A, Roth TL, Nguyen DN, et
al. High-yield genome engineering in primary cells using a
hybrid ssDNA repair template and small-molecule cocktails.
Nat Biotechnol. 2023;41:521–31.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 295. Magnani CF, Gaipa G, Lussana F, Belotti D, Gritti G,
Napolitano S, et al. Sleeping Beauty-engineered CAR T cells
achieve antileukemic activity without severe toxicities. J Clin
Investig. 2020;130:6021–33.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 296. Kebriaei P, Singh H, Huls MH, Figliola MJ, Bassett R, Olivares
S, et al. Phase I trials using Sleeping Beauty to generate
CD19-specific CAR T cells. J Clin Investig. 2016;126:3363–76.
 Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 297. Zhang Y, Zhang Z, Ding Y, Fang Y, Wang P, Chu W, et al.
Phase I clinical trial of EGFR-specific CAR-T cells generated
by the piggyBac transposon system in advanced relapsed/
refractory non-small cell lung cancer patients. J Cancer Res
Clin Oncol. 2021;147:3725–34.
 Article  CAS  PubMed  Google Scholar 
 298. Balke-Want H, Keerthi V, Cadinanos-Garai A, Fowler C,
Gkitsas N, Brown AK, et al. Non-viral chimeric antigen
receptor (CAR) T cells going viral. Immuno Oncol Technol.
2023;18:100375.
 Article  CAS  Google Scholar 
 299. Geurts AM, Collier LS, Geurts JL, Oseth LL, Bell ML, Mu D, et
al. Gene mutations and genomic rearrangements in the mouse
as a result of transposon mobilization from chromosomal
concatemers. PLoS Genet. 2006;2:e156.

Article  PubMed  PubMed Central  Google Scholar 
 300. Bachanova V, Ghobadi A, Patel K, Park JH, Flinn IW, Shah P,
et al. Safety and efficacy of FT596, a first-in-class, multi-
antigen targeted, off-the-shelf, iPSC-derived CD19 CAR NK
cell therapy in relapsed/refractory B-cell lymphoma. Blood.
2021;138:823–823.
 Article  Google Scholar 
 Download references
 Acknowledgements
 We thank all members of the Chen laboratory for the discussions.
SC is supported by the Cancer Research Institute Lloyd J. Old STAR
Award (CRI4964), NIH (R33CA281702), DoD
(W81XWH-21-1-0514, HT94252310472), and Pershing Square Sohn
Cancer Research Alliance.
 Author information
 Author notes
 1. These authors contributed equally: Lei Peng, Giacomo
Sferruzza, Luojia Yang.
 Authors and Affiliations
 1. Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT, USA
 Lei Peng, Giacomo Sferruzza, Luojia Yang, Liqun Zhou & Sidi
Chen
 2. System Biology Institute, Yale University, West Haven, CT,
USA

Lei Peng, Giacomo Sferruzza, Luojia Yang, Liqun Zhou & Sidi
Chen
 3. Combined Program in the Biological and Biomedical Sciences,
Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
 Luojia Yang, Liqun Zhou & Sidi Chen
 4. Molecular Cell Biology, Genetics, and Development Program,
Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
 Luojia Yang & Sidi Chen
 5. Immunobiology Program, Yale University, New Haven, CT,
USA
 Liqun Zhou & Sidi Chen
 6. Yale Comprehensive Cancer Center, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
 Sidi Chen
 7. Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
 Sidi Chen
 8. Yale Stem Cell Center, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT, USA
 Sidi Chen
 9. Yale Liver Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT, USA
 Sidi Chen
 10. Yale Center for Biomedical Data Science, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
 Sidi Chen

11. Yale Center for RNA Science and Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
 Sidi Chen
 Authors
 1. Lei Peng
 View author publications
 Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar
 2. Giacomo Sferruzza
 View author publications
 Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar
 3. Luojia Yang
 View author publications
 Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar
 4. Liqun Zhou
 View author publications
 Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar
 5. Sidi Chen
 View author publications
 Search author on:PubMed Google Scholar
 Contributions
 SC and LP designed the structure of this review. LP drafted the
sections on CAR-T cells. LY and GS drafted the sections on CAR-NK
cells. LZ and GS generated the figures with input from LP and LY.
All authors edited the manuscript text and/or figures. SC secured
funding and supervised the work.
 Corresponding authors

Correspondence to Lei Peng or Sidi Chen.
 Ethics declarations
 Competing interests
 The authors declare no competing interests related to this study. SC
is also a (co)founder of EvolveImmune, Cellinfinity, NumericGlobal,
MagicTime, and Chen Consulting, all unrelated to this study.
 Supplementary information
 clinical trial search results
 Rights and permissions
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format,
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and
the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and
indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative
Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/.
 Reprints and permissions

About this article
 [image]
 Cite this article
 Peng, L., Sferruzza, G., Yang, L. et al. CAR-T and CAR-NK as cellular
cancer immunotherapy for solid tumors. Cell Mol Immunol 21,
1089–1108 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41423-024-01207-0
 Download citation
 • Received: 21 March 2024
 • Accepted: 22 July 2024
 • Published: 12 August 2024
 • Version of record: 12 August 2024
 • Issue date: October 2024
 • DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41423-024-01207-0
 Share this article
 Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this
content:
 Get shareable link
 Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.
 Copy shareable link to clipboard
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 Keywords
 • CAR-T

• CAR-NK
• Cell therapy
• Cancer immunotherapy
• Solid tumor
 This article is cited by
 • PD‑L1 deficient exosomes derived from lung
cancer cell line enhances NK cell‑mediated
anti‑tumor immunity against lung cancer
 ○ Qi Li
○ Juanping Chen
○ Ting Huyan
 Cell Communication and Signaling (2026)
 • Interplay between natural killer cells and
ferroptosis: novel insights in tumor immunity
and therapeutic potential
 ○ Jing Sun
○ Shu Pan
○ Xige Yang
 Cell Communication and Signaling (2026)
 • CAR-engineered cell therapies: current
understandings and future perspectives
 ○ Mobina Bayat
○ Javid Sadri Nahand
 Molecular Biomedicine (2026)
 • Roads and detours for CAR T cell therapy in
autoimmune diseases

○ Jérôme Avouac
○ Adi Barzel
○ Derya Unutmaz
 Nature Reviews Drug Discovery (2026)
 • Redefining cell therapy: CAR-engineered innate
immune cells to conquer solid and hematologic
malignancies
 ○ Ashik Anil Mathew
○ Ronak Raheja
○ Kannan Ramalingam
 Molecular Biology Reports (2026)
 Download PDF 
 Advertisement
 [image]
 Explore content
 • Research articles
• Reviews & Analysis
• News & Comment
• Current issue
• Collections
 • Sign up for alerts
• RSS feed
 About the journal
 • Aims & Scope

• Journal Information
• Open Access Fees and Funding
• About the Editors
• About the Partner
• Editorial Board
• Contact
• For Advertisers
• Subscribe
• Awards
 Publish with us
 • For Authors & Referees
• Language editing services
• Open access funding
 • Submit manuscript
 Search
 Search articles by subject, keyword or author
 Show results from All journals This journal
Search
Advanced search
 Quick links
 • Explore articles by subject
• Find a job
• Guide to authors
• Editorial policies
 Cellular & Molecular Immunology (Cell Mol Immunol)
 ISSN 2042-0226 (online)

ISSN 1672-7681 (print)
 nature.com sitemap
 About Nature Portfolio
 • About us
• Press releases
• Press office
• Contact us
 Discover content
 • Journals A-Z
• Articles by subject
• protocols.io
• Nature Index
 Publishing policies
 • Nature portfolio policies
• Open access
 Author & Researcher services
 • Reprints & permissions
• Research data
• Language editing
• Scientific editing
• Nature Masterclasses
• Research Solutions
 Libraries & institutions
 • Librarian service & tools
• Librarian portal
• Open research
• Recommend to library

Advertising & partnerships
 • Advertising
• Partnerships & Services
• Media kits
• Branded content
 Professional development
 • Nature Awards
• Nature Careers
• Nature Conferences
 Regional websites
 • Nature Africa
• Nature China
• Nature India
• Nature Japan
• Nature Middle East
 • Privacy Policy
• Use of cookies
• Your privacy choices/Manage cookies
• Legal notice
• Accessibility statement
• Terms & Conditions
• Your US state privacy rights
 [image]
 © 2026 Springer Nature Limited

[image]